Title: Pre-Columbian Era
Description: Millennia before Christopher Columbus' voyages to America, there existed a wide variety of tribes across the continent. Most of them arrived by crossing the Beringia land bridge from modern-day Siberia to Alaska searching for food. Their descendants would become known as American Indians (also known as Indians, Native Americans, and First Nations) sprung many distinct groups known as tribes, all with their own unique culture, religion, government, method of gathering food, lifestyle, etc. The tribes were most heavily influenced by their surrounding geography and environment: coastal tribes focused on fishing, those up north relied on catching beavers, Plains Indians hunted the local bison for food, etc. American Indians were typically nomadic, meaning that they migrated from one place to another in search of food and resources. However, once agriculture developed in Mesoamerica, some tribes began to remain in one spot and construct the first civilizations on the continents. Tribes often traded and warred with each other, much like tribes and nations elsewhere in the world and in the past. Life for the American Indians was permanently changed with the arrival of Christopher Columbus and other European explorers, who inadvertently introduced deadly diseases like smallpox to the New World. Indians had never been exposed to these viruses before and therefore had no immunity, leading to extreme vulnerability. Furthermore, Europeans had been able to build up resistances to a variety of pathogens in part because many of them lived near livestock, which are breeding grounds for illnesses. Domesticated animals were almost non-existent in the pre-Columbian Americas, so Indians had no such luck defending themselves from viruses. 90% of the continents' populations were wiped out within a century. Nevertheless, they continued to be a dominant force in the Americas for centuries. Today, they number about 70 million in total across North and South America, with about 5.2 million being in the modern-day United States.


Title: Asian-American land bridge disappears
Description: After thousands of years of gradual sea rise due to the melting of the glaciers, Beringia was swallowed up by the sea, preventing further migration between Asia and North America by land. This had the effect of isolating North and South America from Europe, Asia, and Africa for over 10,000 years, with the two regions growing and developing in isolation.


Title: Agriculture develops in Mesoamerica and Peru
Description: Mesoamericans domesticated the wild teosinte plant into corn. They learned that they could organize plant seeds into rows near their settlements instead of having to migrate across the continent to find wild varieties. This was the start of civilization in Mesoamerica, as if humans could stay in one place, they could build permanent settlements. Additionally, agriculture often produced a surplus of food, allowing people to focus on matters other than food. These settlements of a few families would grow over thousands of years to be small towns, and even cities like Tenochtitlan. Similar developments would occur in Peru, allowing the Inca tribe to flourish. The Aztecs traded their corn with nearby tribes, who learned the art of agriculture as well, though they were never able to build cities as large as Tenochtitlan. Soon, the practice had spread across the continents, though the closer to the Aztecs the tribe was, the more reliant on agriculture they tended to be. Meanwhile, tribes in areas such as the Arctic and Great Plains still relied on their old methods of nomadic hunting and gathering.


Title: Mound builders live in Mississippi Valley
Description: A group of Native Americans known simply as the "mound builders" survived and thrived in Mississippi Valley. They were known as such due to the large dirt mounds they constructed for their buildings. These mounds were organized into communities, such as Poverty Point in modern-day Louisiana. It was a political and economic center that established trade routes and mined minerals like copper and flint.

The inhabitants of the Mississippi River Valley during this period are known as "mound builders" because of the large mounds of earth they constructed thousands of years ago. The oldest known such mound is Watson Brake, constructed in modern-day northern Louisiana around 3500 BC, making it older than both the Egyptian Pyramids and Stonehenge. Watson Brake consists of eleven mounds ranging from 3 to 25 feet high connected by ridges, forming an oval 900 feet in diameter. Poverty Point, also in Louisiana, was built around 2000 years later, circa 1500 BC. It is a series of concentric semicircles overlooking the Mississippi River that takes up a square mile. These structures served as important political and commercial hubs for the mound builders, and were likely inspired by Mayan and Aztec pyramids like the Great Pyramid of Cholula. Archaeologists have found flint from Indiana and copper from Minnesota and Canada at this site, suggesting that the mound builders traded with tribes across the continent. The mound builders appeared to have disappeared around 1000, leaving the valley open for another culture to dominate the valley, Cahokia.


Title: Olmec culture flourishes
Description: The Olmecs were one of the earliest large Native American tribes, and lived in Mesoamerica around modern-day Veracruz, Tabasco, Oaxaca, and Chiapas. The region was similar to the Fertile Crescent in the Middle East, and similarly was able to support cultures much larger than most others in the Americas.

The Olmecs were densely populated, and were famous for producing a large amount of artwork using clay and jade, especially the "colossal heads" made from clay, ranging from 5 to 11 feet tall. They constructed a few large centers, such as San Lorenzo and La Venta in modern-day Tabasco. La Venta contains the Great Pyramid, the largest structure in Mesoamerica at the time, which today reaches 112 ft high after 2500 years of erosion. The Olmecs appear to have made various innovations, such as bloodletting, ball games, writing, the number zero, popcorn, a calendar, and possibly the compass and human sacrifice.

Their rulers were typically important religious and spiritual figures. However, they lacked the developments made by later Mesoamerican societies like the Mayans, such as a standing army or caste system. Their population declined for unknown reasons, but their culture and innovations would be an important start for later cultures, like the Mayans nearly 2000 years later.


Title: Cahokia
Description: Cahokia was a city in the Mississippi River Valley, specifically in modern-day Illinois across the river from the modern city of St. Louis, MO. They first began developing the land around 700, but at its peak between 950 and 1250 they had a massive (for the time) city sporting 10,000-30,000 inhabitants, making it the largest settlement in the modern-day US for around 500-600 years. Like the earlier residents of the Mississippi River Valley, Cahokia contained many earthen mounds constructed by its inhabitants, the largest of which stood 100 feet tall. The settlement appeared to have dwindled by 1300.


Title: Hopi and Zuni
Description: The Hopi and Zuni were tribes that lived in modern-day New Mexico. They lived in settlements that were built into canyons and consisted of multiple-family homes, as well as more advanced structures like dams and canals. The largest known structure was Pueblo Bonita in Chaco Canyon, NM, was 5 stories tall and sported over 600 rooms, a size that was not matched in the US until around 1880.

Like many other Native American civilizations, they frequently traded with other tribes, even those who lived far away, like Cahokia in the Mississippi River Valley and the Aztecs in Mesoamerica. After their peak circa 1200, they moved southeast, likely due to drought, and built villages and developed agriculture further. They lived like this up to when the Spanish encountered them around 1500. They were known as Pueblo Indians by the Spanish because they lived in settlements (pueblos in Spanish), unlike previous Native American tribes they had encountered before.


Title: Erik the Red lands in Greenland
Description: Viking explorer Erik the Red was banished from Iceland for manslaughter. He went searching for Greenland, which had been discovered by fellow Viking Gunnbjørn Ulfsson at the beginning of the century. In 982, he found it, and with Herjolf Bardsson he established the first European settlements in Greenland and in North America, including Herjolfsfjord, Brattahlíð, and Herjolfsnes. These settlements lasted for around 500 years.


Title: Bjarni Herjólfsson discovers Vinland
Description: After Erik the Red set up colonies in Greenland in 892, he reMained their for three years until his exile expired. He subsequently returned to Iceland, he hoped to attract more settlers there, and even called it "Greenland" in order to make the land seem more appealing (though Greenland was actually anything but green). He convinced 25 sips to embark with him in 985.

The journey was perilous, with only 14 making the complete trip. One of these ships contained Bjarni Herjólfsson, a merchant who was blown off course on his way to Greenland. After three days, he discovered land west of Greenland, an area that would later be known as Vinland (modern day Newfoundland). While he didn't explore it and soon rejoined the fleet, he later described the incident to Erik the Red's son, Lief Erikson, who would establish a settlement there in 1000. This event was the first time a European had ever sighted the mainland of the Americas.


Title: Leif Erikson lands in Vinland
Description: Around 985, Viking explorer Bjarni Herjólfsson sighted some land west of Greenland, an incident he later described to Leif Erikson, the son of Erik the Red, who had himself discovered Greenland. Leif Erikson, himself being an explorer, took a crew of 35 and found land west of Greenland, which he named Vinland. They established the settlement of L'Anse aux Meadows on a large island (modern-day Newfoundland) and explored further, getting as far as modern-day New Brunswick (mainland North America) and even interacted with some of the American Indians living there. This marked the first time a European set foot on the North American mainland, though L'Anse aux Meadows was sparsely populated and interactions between the Vikings and American Indians were few. It would not be until Christopher Columbus' arrival nearly five centuries later that the Old and New Worlds would truly intermingle.


Title: Indian Reorganization Act
Description: 


Title: Iroquois Confederacy
Description: Sometime around 1142, the Iroquois Confederacy, an alliance of 5 Native American tribes (Mohawk, Onondaga, Oneida, Cayuga, and Seneca). They were known as the Five Nations to England.


Title: Magna Carta
Description: The Magna Carta Libertatum was a charter of rights drafted by the Archbishop of Canterbury and agreed to by King John of England in order to appease the barons angry at the king. However, neither side respected the document, and increased hostilities led to the First Barons' War. John died in 1216, and his successor Henry III helped amend the document with its more extreme parts cut out. The document was amended again in 1217 and 1225.

With 63 clauses written in Latin, was the first written constitution in Europe. It enumerated specific powers of the barons and other powerful English citizens, excluding most others. Its largest impact was on the legal system, as no longer could anyone be imprisoned without due process of law.

It served as inspiration for the 1776 Declaration of Independence and the 1789 Bill of Rights, like the Fifth Amendment, protect American citizens' rights to due process of law.


Title: Marco Polo travels the Silk Road
Description: Around the turn of the 14th century, Venetian merchant Marco Polo published his memoir of his travels along the Silk Road, taking him through the Middle East, Central Asia, and China. The memoir was very successful, and invoked a strong interest in merchants to trade with China. Among those he inspired was Christopher Columbus, who centuries later would stumble upon the Americas in an attempt to find a trade route with China.

Polo's claims about his journey are largely unsubstantiated, and the myth that he introduced pasta to Italy is just that. Nevertheless, he provoked interest amongst Europeans to find trade routes to Asia, which would mark the beginning of the Age of Discovery.


Title: Tenochtitlán founded
Description: Tenochtitlán was a large city that would later become capital of the Aztec Empire. At its peak, it was the largest city the Americas would see until the arrival of Europeans. It sported constructions like aqueducts, large temples, and palaces. By the time the Spanish arrived, it likely housed around 200,000 people, making it one of the largest cities in the world at the time.

It was founded in 1325 by the Mexica people. According to Mexica legend, it was founded by wandering tribes who were destined to come upon the site where they would build a great city, akin to the creation myth of Rome. It steadily grew in size and influence until it became the dominant power in the region. The city established trade routes that spanned the Gulf of Mexico to the Pacific Ocean.

Tenochtitlán had a complex hierarchy of social classes, including divisions of peasants, indentured servants, merchants, nobles, and royalty. King Montezuma resided in a palace with zoos, a garden, and an aquarium. Tens of thousands of people traded in marketplaces on a daily basis.

Tenochtitlán would stand for nearly two centuries, at the end of which Spanish conquistador Hernán Cortés razed the city and had Mexico City built in its place.


Title: Crow Creek Massacre
Description: A conflict between American Indian tribes in modern-day South Dakota along the Missouri River between Middle Missouri and Central Plains tribes. Around 1350, the Middle Missouri attacked a Central Plains village. There is evidence of scalping and other such body mutilations, as well as previous conflicts with each other. It is unknown what began the conflict.

Casualties: 486 American Indians


Title: Zheng He's voyages in the Indian Ocean
Description: In 1403, desiring to project Chinese influence over the Indian Ocean and impress its peoples with the empire's wealth and power, the Yongle Emperor of Ming China commissioned a fleet of 62 ships and 225 support vessels carrying over 25,000 crewmen led by Fleet Admiral Zheng He. This expedition coincided with the beginning of the Age of Exploration in Europe, which was attempting to discover alternate trade routes to China. Unlike these expeditions, Zheng would be following pre-mapped routes. Because his goal was to impress and control, Zheng was given control of a much larger fleet than what would be needed for an ordinary overseas exploration.

Zheng traveled across the Pacific Ocean, stopping at Brunei, Java, Southeast Asia, India, the Horn of Africa, and Arabia. As a display of China's wealth and generosity, Zheng gifted the locals with porcelain, silk, gold, and silver, and in return received exotic gifts like zebras, camels, ivory, and even a giraffe. Generally he and his crew were friendly with those he met, his large force typically being enough to amaze others into submission, though he did wage war against the Kingdom of Kotte.

Upon the death of the Yongle Emperor in 1424, Zheng's expedition was canceled, the new emperor seeing no need to expand China's influence when it was already so wealthy. This left Europe to continue the Age of Exploration. Though Zheng's voyages would not have much of an impact on American history, had China chose to pursue exploring beyond the Indian Ocean and into the Pacific they may have stumbled upon the Americas from the west coast before Christopher Columbus arrived from the east.


Title: Prince Henry the Navigator's seafaring research
Description: Infante Dom Henrique, the Portuguese prince nicknamed Henry the Navigator, wanted to develop Portugal's seafaring capabilities. In 15th century Europe, commerce relied on trade with Asia. The main routes involved traversing the Mediterranean Sea, controlled by Italian merchants. If a kingdom without their own access to Asia wanted to trade, they would have to pay the Italians as middlemen. Portugal, sitting at the westernmost edge of the Mediterranean, had to pay higher prices for Asian goods, and looked for less expensive alternatives. If they could find a sea route to Asia around the Mediterranean, as Prince Henry hoped, they could get their cheaper goods. He began financing research into sea travel and navigation, research that bore fruit. Their biggest breakthrough was the caravel. While their other ships were built for sailing the calm Mediterranean waters, the caravel sported a deep draft that could sustain the boat through long, rough voyages on the open waters. It could carry heavy cargo, which would be critical for merchant ships. It was fast, agile, and could be manned with a small crew. His team also made improvements to the astrolabe, a tool for precise navigation. With these two inventions in hand, the Portuguese were set to explore the Atlantic Ocean. Within a few decades, Portugal built ports along the African coast and became the first Europeans to sail around the Horn of Africa, granting them access to the Indian Ocean and direct trade with Asia. Prince Henry the Navigator's research would place Portugal at the forefront of the Age of Exploration and established the kingdom as a dominant empire overseas.


Title: Portuguese explore African coast south of the Sahara
Description: Portugal was the European country at the forefront of the quest for a sea route to India. They also wanted to control the vast sources of wealth (from gold, mostly) in Africa. They began financing expeditions in the 1430s, who soon found success in traveling along the African coast. In 1434, explorers brought a sprig of rosemary from West Africa back to Portugal as proof they had made it there. This proved that the mighty Sahara Desert could be passed by sea. Delighted with the results, Portugal began financing further expeditions.


Title: Johannes Gutenberg's printing press
Description: 


Title: Iroquois Confederacy formed
Description: The Iroquois Confederacy, known as the Five Nations to the English, was an alliance of Midwestern and Northeastern tribes, the Cayuga, Mohawk, Oneida, Onondaga, and Seneca. They appeared to have originated around modern-day Quebec, specifically Montreal, but were driven south due to wars with neighboring tribes. Oral Iroquois history states that the confederacy was formed by Dekanawida ("the Great Peacemaker"), Hiawatha, and Jigonhsasee ("the Mother of Nations"). Dekanawida created an oral pact known as the Great Peace and the three brought it to the five rival tribes, who agreed to band together and protect each other.

Once the Iroquois Confederacy was formed, they fought little amongst each other and usually fought against other tribes together. This teamwork, along with their frequent warring with nearby tribes, allowed them to become the dominant tribes in the region, with a population of 12,000 at their peak in 1600. When the French and English arrived in North America, the Iroquois became adept at playing them off against each other in order to reduce their presence and distract them from conquering the land. They defeated many of their enemies during the Beaver Wars of the 17th century, such as the Huron and Susquehannock. They initially sided with the French, as they were usually more cooperative than the English in their affairs, but started to side with the English in the 1670s and into the four colonial wars between the French and the English/British. They reMained a dominant force in America until the end of the War of 1812, which removed the last of Native American power in the country.


Title: Fall of Constantinople
Description: Constantinople was the capital of the Byzantine Empire, a city that rested in the Marmara Region of modern-day Turkey. In 1453, the city was captured by the Ottoman Turks. The Muslim Turks subsequently banned Christian traders from passing through the city, as part of the long-standing conflict between the two religions. Previously, Christian traders had enjoyed a safe trip from their homeland in Europe to Asia and back through the Silk Road, where they could sell their traded goods. They had been protected by Pax Mongolica, the Mongol Empire's control over Asia. Being blocked from this route was a serious detriment to their businesses, and to the economy of trade-reliant European kingdoms like Spain and Portugal. With the land route closed, Europe began searching for routes to Asia by sea instead.


Title: Ferdinand and Isabella unite Spain
Description: King Ferdinand of II of Aragon and Queen Isabella I of Castille married, in effect uniting the two kingdoms into Spain. This union would strengthen Spain and set it up to rival Portugal and lead the Age of Exploration when the opportunity presented itself.


Title: Age of Exploration
Description: The Age of Exploration was a time period in which European and Chinese explorers sailed the oceans to discover new land and routes.

Portugal was the nation most involved in overseas exploration. Their economy depended heavily on the spice trade with India, so when the Ottoman Turks captured Constantinople in 1453 and blocked European merchants from traveling through the Silk Road, Portugal decided to explore other routes to India. This push outside the known world coincided with advancements in seafaring and navigation technology. Discovery of new land and trade routes had always held the potential for profit, but carried various risks of disease, attacks from natives, and starvation. With this new technology, exploration had become safer and easier, the profit finally outweighing the risks.

Portuguese explorers discovered the Madeira and Azores Islands in the early 15th century, then moved on to the West African coast. By 1498, Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama had reached the Horn of Africa, establishing a Portuguese trade route to the East. Meanwhile, Ming China had sent Zheng He to extend the nation's influence in the Indian Ocean and impress the region's inhabitants with China's power and wealth, though he never reached as far as the Pacific Ocean.

While Portugal was busy finding an eastern route, Spain funded an expedition led by Genoese explorer Christopher Columbus to find a trade route to the west. Instead, Columbus stumbled upon the Caribbean and even new continents, the Americas. Spain and other European countries, like England, France, Portugal, and the Dutch Republic began sending their own explorers out west to claim the newly discovered land, bringing them into contact with American Indians for the first time in 500 years, at a scale far beyond Leif Erikson's interactions.

The Age of Exploration brought together the two halves of the world that had lived independently for millennia, minus the negligible interactions with American Indians and Leif Erikson. The discovery of the Americas brought about a new age of prosperity and power for the European nations that pursued colonialism. It oversaw a massive upscale in slavery, both of American Indians and Africans, in order to work the newly developed colonial plantations.

With the discovery of the Americas came the Columbian Exchange, an exchange of ideas, crops, animals, and diseases that would permanently change both the Old and New World. Christianity began to spread amongst the Indians, both voluntarily and coerced. Agricultural tribes began to grow wheat and rice, while Europeans took interest in corn, potatoes, and tobacco. Indian ways of life would be permanently changed with the introduction of firearms from the Europeans, granting a massive advantage to those who traded for them in hunting and warfare. Escaped horses from the Spanish would be captured and bred by Great Plains tribes, who used them extensively for transport, hunting, and war. Diseases like smallpox, as well as European conquests, would devastate American Indian populations to a degree they would never recover from.


Title: Bartholomew Diaz explores the Horn of Africa
Description: In 1487, Portuguese explorer Bartholomew Diaz was sent by King John II of Portugal to travel along the African coast in order to find a viable trade route to Asia. Previously, Portuguese traders had relied on the Silk Road to obtain their goods, but once that road had been blocked by the Ottoman Turks, Portugal began financing expeditions to discover a sea route. In May 1488, Diaz came across the Horn of Africa, which he called the Cape of Good Hope. This was the halfway point between Portugal and India, and was the final part in charting the sea route Portugal would need to trade with Asia, allowing its commerce to flow once more. Upon this discovery, Spain realized that with the Ottomans controlling the Silk Road and Portugal controlling the eastern sea route, they would have to find an alternative route to India if they hoped to trade as well. To this end, it was Spain, not Portugal, that financed Christopher Columbus' expedition westward, and it was in her name that he conquered land in the Caribbean.


Title: Christopher Columbus' first voyage
Description: Genoese explorer Christopher Columbus had the idea that instead of sailing around Africa to reach India, traders could sail west instead. It was common knowledge among the educated at that point in time that the Earth was round, and that you could travel either east or west and arrive at the same point if you went far enough. Columbus wanted to use that to find a new and hopefully faster route to India than sailing around an entire continent. He received a map from Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli, a renowned Italian cartographer who shared Columbus' enthusiasm for a westward route to Asia. However, Toscenelli's map was significantly out of touch with reality, depicting Asia as 5000 miles longer than it was. Toscanelli also suggested to Columbus that there were inhabited islands east of Japan, so the Genoan would likely not even have to travel the full distance before resupplying. Columbus was also influenced by Marco Polo, who centuries ago wrote of the location of Cipangu (Japan) was much farther east than it actually is. Finally, Columbus' own calculations of the Earth relied on measurements made by medieval Persian geographer Alfraganus, who used the Arabic mile. Columbus confused this with the smaller Roman mile he was more used to. All of this together meant that Columbus wildly underestimated the distance he would have to travel. Had the Americas and Caribbean not existed like nearly everyone in the Old World believed, Columbus would have had to traveled four times the distance he calculated.

Nevertheless, he approached several European monarchs with his idea, hoping they would fund his expedition. He first came to King John II of Portugal, who turned him down, correctly thinking that Columbus had misjudged the distance to travel. Columbus approached John II again 3 years later, but was turned down again, this time because Bartolomeu Dias had just returned with news of reaching the Cape of Good Hope. John II saw that his country was on the verge of reaching India from the east, and saw no reason to fund an expedition to the west. Columbus tried in Genoa and Venice, and his brother Bartholomew tried England, but to no avail. He then approached King Ferdinand II and Queen Isabella I of Spain, who initially turned him down for the same reasons as Portugal. He lobbied the Spanish court for 2 years until the king and queen agreed to fund his voyage, granting him the title "Admiral of the Ocean Sea," allowing him to be governor of any new land he could claim for Spain, and letting him keep 1/10 of the revenue from his expedition.

On August 3, 1492, he set off for India with 3 ships, the Pinta, the Niña, and the Santa María. At 2:00 on the morning of October 12, Pinta sailor Rodrigo de Triana sighted land and informed the crew. Columbus later asserted that he himself had seen the land a few hours earlier, allowing him to claim the lifetime pension offered by the King and Queen of Spain offered for that accomplishment. Columbus had stumbled upon an island in the Caribbean, previously unknown to exist by the Europeans. It was named San Salvador ("the savior" in Spanish), though what island that was is a mystery. The most likely candidate remains Watling Island (renamed to San Salvador Island, believing that they were in fact the island Columbus discovered). There, he was met by several tribes of indigenous people, the largest of which were the Taínos. Believing that he was on an island in the Indies, Columbus called the people "Indians." Columbus observed them for a while and moved on, landing in northeastern Cuba on October 28 and western Hispaniola on December 5.

The Santa María ran aground on December 25 in Hispaniola and had to be abandoned. There, he was granted permission by Taíno cacique Guacanagarí to leave 39 people to found a settlement, which was named La Navidad, the first European settlement in the New World since the Vikings. The Niña and the Pinta set sail for Spain on January 15, 1493. After pushing through some powerful storms, Columbus and co. landed in the Azores, where half his people were arrested on suspicion of piracy by the island's captain, João de Castenheira. However, he was unable to arrest Columbus or get any of his men to confess, so he released them all within a few days. He arrived in Spain a few weeks later, to much celebration.

Columbus explained his journey to the Spanish monarchs, in which he insisted he had reached Asia and an island off the coast of China. He also greatly exaggerated the the beauty of the landscape and the riches to be found in the Caribbean. He proceeded to show off his goods from the New World, including gold and jewelry, tobacco, pineapples, turkeys, and a hammock, though there was none of the spices so coveted from the East Indies. Nevertheless, Ferdinand and Isabella were impressed with his findings and financed a second voyage for later that year.

Columbus was far from the first to land on American land. Thousands of years before him, nomads crossed into the region that would become their new home. Nearly 500 years before the Genoan's voyage, Vikings had built a small settlement in Newfoundland. What Columbus did do was begin the union of the two halves of the world in a way they had never seen before. No longer would western lands be legend to the Old Worlders, and never again would American Indians be free from contact with Europeans. For better or for worse, the world would not be the same after Columbus' voyage.


Title: Christopher Columbus' governorship of the West Indies
Description: In April 1492, when Christopher Columbus approached the Spanish Crown with his idea for a voyage, he was promised his success would be rewarded with the rank of Admiral of the Ocean Sea. Further, he would be governor of any new land he claimed for Spain. After Columbus discovered the Caribbean, which was contemporarily called the West Indies, and returned to Spain, he was sent back in 1494. He was tasked with expanding Spanish influence, exploring the region, converting the Indians, and collecting gold.

Under Columbus' governorship, colonists were free to live with and marry indigenous women and take them back to Spain if they desired. Columbus sent a letter to Ferdinand and Isabella proposing the enslavement of several hundred Indians to pay for the voyage. His offer was rejected, but in February 1495 he ignored this and captured 1600 Arawaks and given to the Caribs (400 were released due to a lack of space on board). He captured an additional 560 Indians, who were shipped to Spain, 200 dying along the way and another 100-200 falling ill. Isabella was disgusted: she saw the natives as subjects of the Spanish Crown, not slaves, and promptly returned most of them to the Caribbean.

However, Columbus still needed to pay his investors. To do so, he created a tribute system in the Province of Cicao on Hispaniola. He required every Cicaoan native 14 years old or older to collect a quota of gold for him every three months. Once the individual had met their quota, they would be given a copper token to wear around their neck. Any Indian found without a token would have their hands cut off. There was little gold in Hispaniola, meaning that these quotas were practically impossible to fulfill. Columbus was famously brutal. He and his men enslaved children, raped women, and abused the Indians for failing to bring gold that wasn't there. Thousands committed suicide, believing Columbus' wrath to be worse than death.

In March, Columbus led a force of men against the Taínos as revenge for the massacre at La Navidad. They killed and captured, and took Caonabo prisoner, who was then sent to Spain. In June 1495, the settlement was struck by a powerful storm. The Taínos called it a "huricán," after their god of evil (giving rise to the English word "hurricane"). The fleet's flagship, the Marie-Galante, was destroyed in the storm. At this point, many of the colonists were sick, the Taínos' numbers had diminished by two thirds from starvation, disease and Columbus' cruelty, and the Genoan himself was having little luck with his search for gold. Columbus returned for Spain on March 10, 1496.

In 1498, Columbus once again sailed around the Caribbean. The next year, he became sick and returned to Hispaniola. There he found his colonists in revolt. They complained that Columbus had misled them about the amount of riches to be found there. He was sued, and was forced to make peace with the colonists. 

In 1500, he was investigated by the Spanish Crown under charge of brutalities against the colonists. They sent Francisco de Bobadilla, a relative of a close friend of Queen Isabella, to Hispaniola. Bobadilla reported complaints of various atrocities committed by the Columbus brothers. A striking example was the claim that Columbus punished a man caught stealing corn by cutting off his ears and nose and selling him into slavery. Bobadilla deposed Columbus as governor, stole his possessions, instated himself as governor, and shipped the Columbus brothers off to prison in Spain. There they sat for six months until they made their case to the Spanish monarchs. They were shocked by Bobadilla's actions and removed him as governor. They released the Columbus brothers from prison and made Bobadilla return their possessions. However, they still took Bobadilla's reports of Columbus' cruelty seriously, and refused to give him back the governorship. Columbus would spend the rest of his life contesting this, but was unsuccessful. Instead, Nicolás de Ovando would become the new Governor of the Indies. Ovando would end up being even crueler to the Taínos than Columbus was.


Title: Columbian Exchange
Description: The Columbian Exchange was the exchange of goods, cultures, and (inadvertently) diseases between the inhabitants of the Old World (Europe, Asia, Africa) and the New World (North America, South America, the Caribbean).

Upon first contact between the two peoples, they began trading goods with each other. The Indians traded Europeans crops like corn, potatoes, and tobacco, which would go on to influence European diets, economies, and cultures. For example, potatoes would become the primary edible crop in Ireland, and for decades the primary cash crop for the New World colonies in the modern-day US Southeast would be tobacco.

In return, Europeans brought over wheat, livestock, alcohol, and new technology to the Americas. The introduction of firearms to the Americas dramatically shifted the balance of power between the Indian tribes towards those who possessed them. Guns would replace bows and spears as the weapon of choice for hunting and warfare. Great Plains lifestyles were significantly changed with the introduction of horses to the continent. Some of the steeds had escaped the Spanish and had been captured and bred by Great Plains tribes. Because their diet relied on nomadically hunting fast-moving bison herds, having a reliable, fast, and efficient mount made hunting bison significantly easier.

However, the most important thing brought into the New World were diseases. Europeans at that time tended to live near their livestock, which was a perfect breeding ground for diseases. Many of these diseases, including cholera, measles, the bubonic plague, typhus, tuberculosis, and especially smallpox, were categorized as "plagues," defined by their fast. airborne spread and rapid progression of the disease in the body. While Europe was hit hard by these plagues centuries ago, they had since built up resistances to them (especially the plague). In contrast, Indians had no livestock, meaning they were rarely affected by diseases, resulting in a lack of immunity. They had never encountered diseases like smallpox before, so they were caught off guard by its effects. The disease was usually transmitted accidentally; there was no evidence of intentional infection until 1763. Nevertheless, the disease swept through Indian populations, cutting down their numbers by as much as 90, a population drop from which Indians would never recover from.

Though they were transmitted accidentally, they weakened Indian populations enough for European conquerors and colonists to much more easily defeat them in war and take over the land. Europeans also received New World diseases, like syphilis, but were not affected at the same scale as the Indians, as the New World diseases did not spread as rapidly or easily as those brought from the Old World. The Columbian Exchange died down around the turn of the 17th century, when enough of each good from each side of the Atlantic Ocean had been transferred to the other.


Title: Columbus lands in San Salvador
Description: See "Columbus' first voyage"


Title: Christopher Columbus' second voyage
Description: After the success of his first voyage, King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain sent Christopher Columbus back to the Caribbean with a fleet of two naos (large sailboats) and 15 caravels (small sailboats), including the Niña from the first voyage. He was instructed to maintain good relations with the natives. He left Spain on September 24 1493 with 1500 men. Among those men was Juan de la Cosa, who would make the first map including the New World, Juan Ponce de León, the first governor of Puerto Rico and Florida, and Diego Columbus, the Admiral's youngest brother. The fleet landed on an island Columbus named Dominica on November 3. From there, he explored numerous islands in the Lesser Antilles, including Santa María de Galante (now known as Marie-Galante), Les Saintes (Todos los Santos), Santa María de Guadalupe (Guadalupe), Santa María de Montserrat (Montserrat), Santa María la Antigua (Antigua), Santa María la Redonda (Saint Martin), Santa Cruz (Saint Croix), the archipelago Santa Úrsula y las Once Mil Vírgenes (the Virgin Islands), and Virgin Gorda. He then made his way to the Greater Antilles, landing on San Juan Baptista (Puerto Rico) on November 19.

Three days later, he arrived at Hispaniola, where he discovered the ruins of La Navidad, the settlement formed by the former crew of the Santa María after it ran aground. He learned that the residents had fought with local Taínos led by cacique Caonabo and were killed. Columbus established a new settlement to the north of the island, named La Isabela. He and his men went searching for gold around Hispaniola, but found little. Columbus left on April 24, 1494, and landed in Juana (Cuba) six days later. He explored the island, believing it to be a peninsula of China, as well as Discovery Bay in Jamaica, La Evangelista (the Isle of Youth), and numerous other small islands. He returned to Hispaniola on August 20 and lived in La Isabela for several years, where he would continue to act as Governor of the West Indies.


Title: La Isabela founded
Description: La Isabela was the first Spanish city in the New World. It was founded around December 1493 by Christopher Columbus on his second voyage to the Americas (or what he thought was Asia).


Title: Treaty of Tordesillas
Description: The Treaty of Tordesillas was an agreement between Spain and Portugal to divide up claims of the New World. It was intended to settle a dispute that arose after Christopher Columbus' voyages to the New World. When the explorer arrived from his first voyage, he stopped in Lisbon to show his findings to King John II of Portugal, who had previously refused to finance his mission. King John was furious at King Ferdinand and Queen Isebella of Spain, and sent a letter claiming that the 1479 Treaty of Alcáçovas granted Portugal control of all land south of the Canary Islands, which included the new land discovered by Columbus. He claimed he was already dispatching a fleet to claim his new prize.

Spain knew that they were no match for the might of the Portuguese navy, so she appealed to Pope Alexander VI for help. The Pope was Aragonese (a kingdom of Spain), so he would likely favor Spain, and both Spain and Portugal were Catholic, so they would respect any decision he made. On May 4 1493, the Pope issued the Inter caetera, a bull that granted Spain the right to any land west of a pole-to-pole line 100 leagues from the Cape Verde or the Azores Islands. On the 25th of September later that year, he issued the Dudem siquidem, which granted Spain permission to take any land, including islands, ever under the domain of India, even if it was east of the Inter caetera line. Portugal was not mentioned in either bull, meaning that the country could not claim any newly discovered land, even if it was west of the line.

Needless to say, King John was none too pleased with this arrangement. He wanted to control India, a land full of expensive spices and other goods that would enrich Portugal. Not wanting to cross the Pope, however, he instead opened negotiations with King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella to allow Portugal to claim some New World land. They signed a treaty in Tordesillas, Spain, which included a new line of demarcation, identical to the Inter caetera line but 270 leagues to the west. This granted Portugal control of the South Atlantic, as well as a small portion of modern-day Brazil. It also allotted all of Africa to Portugal, allowed her to maintain her grip there. Pope Julius II would support the treaty over a decade later.

The treaty was not particularly forceful. It was recognized by no other European country, including England and France. It was not well-defined, being measured in distance from another island rather than in degrees. Spain did not object when Portugal continued to expand across South America, past where the treaty defined its jurisdiction It would be ignored between 1580 and 1640, when Spain and Portugal shared a monarch, and it was forgone entirely when Spanish and Portuguese power diminished to the point where it could not be enforced against other countries, like England, France, the Dutch Republic, and Sweden. Nevertheless, it was responsible for roughly confining Portuguese territory (aka Brazil) to the east of the continent, and vice versa for the Spanish.


Title: Santo Domingo founded
Description: The city of Santo Domingo was built on the island of Hispaniola (modern borders shown) by the Spanish, making it the oldest European settlement in the Americas to be continuously inhabited. It was originally founded by Bartholomew Columbus, and named La Nueva Isabela, after Queen Isabella I of Spain. It was renamed Santo Domingo after Saint Dominic. It became the gateway to the Caribbean and nearby mainland for the Spanish.


Title: John Cabot's voyages to Newfoundland
Description: In 1492, Christopher Columbus discovered the Caribbean Islands while attempting to find a western sea route from Europe to Asia. The discovery interested explorers across Europe, hoping to find a passage through the newly-discovered lands that would take them to Asia. At this time, no European knew of the continents that laid just west of the Caribbean.

One such explorer was an Italian named John Cabot, who on March 5, 1496 received funding from King Henry VII of England to chart the coveted western sea route to Asia. He set sail with his lone ship on May 2 1497 from Bristol, arriving in the New World at what is believed to be Cape Bonavista in Newfoundland on June 24, claiming the land for England. Like Columbus, Cabot believed he was in Asia, in his case in the northeast. Though it would later turn out that he had not in fact reached Asia, his voyage was historic in that it marked the first time a European had set foot on the North American mainland since Leif Erikson five centuries earlier. However, Cabot and his crew did not encounter any American Indians, and he spent very little time there before sailing back to Bristol.

King Henry VII paid Cabot upon his return and sent him out for another expedition. Cabot set sail in May 1498, this time with his ship filled with goods, presumably for trading with any natives he encountered. Although he had not seen any on his first trip, he had seen evidence of people living there, like an extinguished campfire. However, what became of Cabot during his second voyage is unknown, as he never returned to Europe and was presumed dead.


Title: John Cabot lands in Newfoundland
Description: See "John Cabot's voyages to Newfoundland."


Title: Vasco da Gama's voyage to India
Description: When Bartholomew Diaz reached the Cape of Good Hope in 1488, Portugal was convinced that it would soon have control over the entire eastern sea route to India. Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama would confirm this control in his voyage a decade later. In 1497 he set sail from Lisbon with four ships and 170 men. By the end of the year, he had rounded the Horn of Africa and was making his way to India. He arrived in Calicut, India on May 20 1498 and traded a few goods with the Indians there. da Gama slowly made his way back to Lisbon, arriving on July 10 the next year.

This voyage would cement Portugal's control over the eastern sea route to Asia. da Gama, along with the work of Prince Henry the Navigator, would assert Portugal as a dominant power in the Age of Exploration and in the Indian Ocean, after China had given up on its voyages in the region. In order to secure the passage, Portugal began establishing colonies all along the African coast. Because the kingdom possessed a powerful navy, others in Europe had little hope in challenging Portugal's supremacy along the African coast, forcing them to turn west if they hoped to trade with India and China.


Title: Christopher Columbus' third voyage
Description: The objective of Columbus' next voyage was to verify the existence of a continent west of the Cape Verde Islands (which were off the coast of Africa). Prior to this, Columbus had just discovered islands, the largest of which was Cuba. He set sail from Spain on May 30, 1498 with six ships, entering a channel called Dragon's Mouth on the island of Trinidad on July 31, and disembarking at Punta de Arenal (today called Icacos Point) on August 2. From there, he could see the land of a continent unknown to the Old World, which Columbus called Paria (now Venezuela). He explored the waters between Trinidad and the mainland (which he called the Gulf of Paria), then set foot on the mainland at the Paria Peninsula. Columbus investigated the Orinoco River, and observed that it deposited large amounts of fresh water into the Atlantic Ocean, a sure sign of a continent. This continent was South America, and this instance was the first time a European had set foot on its mainland. However, Columbus again thought that he was in Asia. He fell ill and returned to Hispaniola in 1499.


Title: Juan de la Cosa's map
Description: Juan de la Cosa was a Castilian cartographer who around 1500 drew a map of the world. While his depiction of Europe, Asia, and Africa was nothing special, his map was the first to include the New World. Because that land had only been discovered a few years prior, there was scant information about it. His map includes Cuba, Hispaniola, Puerto Rico, and a large, imprecise swath of continental land. Cosa's map was also the first to portray Cuba as an island, rather than as an Asian peninsula as Christopher Columbus had believed.


Title: Pedro Cabral's accidental voyage to Brazil
Description: Pedro Álvarez Cabral was a Portuguese noble who in 1500 was tasked with commanding a fleet to sail to India. Cabral was not a trained sailor or navigator, and was chosen for the expedition due to his noble lineage. Therefore, across his voyage he made his fair share of blunders, though one turned out to be fortunate for Portugal.

The fleet set sail on March 9 and headed out from Lisbon. The idea was to sail to the Portuguese colony of Cape Verde, then sail west with the winds, then south around Africa. But Cabral sailed too far west. They hit land almost two months later, on April 22, finding themselves in the New World. Cabral named the land the Monte Pascoal, or "Easter Mount," as they had found it the week of Easter. Today the northeastern coast of present-day Brazil, it was inhabited by the Tupiniquim, a tribe of Stone Age hunter-gatherers. They got along well with the Portuguese, who built a cross to symbolize their claim to the land. They did not do much else, and soon left to resume their journey to India.

Though they spent a short time there, it was the first of many journeys the Portuguese would make to Brazil, and it did serve to tangibly establish their claim over the land.


Title: First African slaves arrive in Hispaniola
Description: At the turn of the 16th century, the Spanish Crown noticed that the Taíno population on Hispaniola was declining. This was mostly due to disease, but the brutal treatment they suffered under Christopher Columbus and later Nicolás de Ovando did not help. They decided to send African slaves to replenish the working population. The first arrived in Santo Domingo in 1501, with most being sent to work in copper mines. There were only a few hundred of them, little compared to the Spanish or Taíno population on the island. They were the first Africans to arrive in the New World.


Title: Amerigo Vespucci's voyage to Brazil
Description: Amerigo Vespucci was a Florentine merchant and explorer who in 1501 was tasked by King Manuel I of Portugal to explore the land inadvertently discovered by Pedro Cabral a year earlier. Portugal had previously rejected Columbus for funding a westward expedition to India, confident that they had secured the eastern route. However, now that Columbus had discovered potentially highly valuable islands and even signs of a continent, there was no reason for the kingdom to not get in on the action. They also, like the Spanish, wanted to spread Catholicism across the world in order to save the souls of pagans. The Portuguese were interested in finding Prester John, a mythical Christian king who would make a powerful ally against the Ottoman Empire. Not only were the Ottomans Muslims and therefore an enemy of Christian Portugal, but they were blocking European trade routes across Anatolia, which was the reason Europe was looking for alternative trade routes to India in the first place. Perhaps Prester John was somewhere to the west of the Atlantic Ocean. Finally, they wanted to explore and colonize the land allotted to them by the 1494 Treaty of Tordesillas, and wished to find out how much of the land Cabral found fell under that claim.

Unlike Cabral, Vespucci was selected because of his reputation as a skilled explorer. He left Lisbon with three ships in May 1501. While stopped at Cape Verde for resupplying, Vespucci ran into Cabral as he was returning from the land Vespucci was about to explore. Vespucci's fleet came ashore on August 17, at Brazil around a latitude of 6° south. They sailed farther south, encountering both friendly and hostile natives. On January 1, 1502, they reached a large river. They named it Rio de Janeiro, or "River of January," after the date they discovered it. On February 13, they left for home.

Soon after, Vespucci wrote a letter describing his findings. He called the land "a "New World," since our forebears had absolutely no knowledge of it, nor do any of those who are hearing about it today." The phrase "New World" from then on would be used to describe the land west of the Atlantic and east of the Pacific, which those in Europe, Asia, and Africa, had only just discovered. Unlike Columbus, he believed the land he discovered was a new continent, not Asia. Others read Vespucci's accounts and were intrigued by this discovery. Two such readers were Matthias Ringmann and Martin Waldseemüller, a pair of French scholars. In 1507, they wrote an Introduction to Cosmography, which featured a world map with the newly discovered land on it. Ringmann wrote of the new land that "I see no reason why anyone could properly disapprove of a name derived from that of Amerigo, the discoverer, a man of sagacious genius." He proposed the name "America," a feminized version of "Amerigo," as both Europe and Asia had feminine names. The Introduction to Cosmography and accompanying map were successful, and the name "America" was frequently used to refer to the western continents.


Title: Christopher Columbus' fourth voyage
Description: In 1500, Christopher Columbus lost his position as Governor of the Indies. Desperate to reclaim his glory, he extensively petitioned the Spanish Crown to finance a fourth voyage to the Indies. They agreed, tasking him with finding a route to the Indian Ocean through the Strait of Malacca. The strait is located between the island of Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula in southeast Asia. Columbus believed his previous voyages had taken him to Asia, even to the mainland on his last voyage. As such, he believed finding the Strait of Malacca was plausible. Columbus also wanted to take the opportunity to circumnavigate the world, and if successful would be the first person to do so. He was directly ordered not to stop at Hispaniola, possibly to avoid him trying to get his old position back from Bobadilla.

Columbus set out on March 14, 1502 with 147 men, including his stepbrother, Bartolomeo (anglicized to Bartholomew), and his 13-year-old son Ferdinand. They arrived at Martinique on June 15. Columbus had experienced a hurricane in 1495, and he could see that another was forming. Despite orders from the Crown, he sailed to Santo Domingo to repair his ships to weather the storm. Bobadilla refused to let him land and would not hear anything of the coming storm. Instead, he left Hispaniola for Spain and took thirty ships with him. Onboard the flimsiest ship in his fleet was $10 million USD worth of Columbus' gold Bobadilla had confiscated from the former governor after arresting him. Bobadilla did not make it far; he had barely left Hispaniola when the storm grew worse and wrecked the fleet. Nearly every ship was destroyed, including Bobadilla's. Three ships managed to make it back to Santo Domingo, and somehow the flimsy ship carrying Columbus' gold was the only one that made it to Spain.

Columbus and his men were able to weather the storm, having sought refuge at the mouth of the Haina River in eastern Hispaniola. After the hurricane subsided, they briefly landed in Cuba to resupply, then headed due south to start looking for the Strait of Malacca. They ran into Central America, in modern-day Honduras on July 30. They met with native merchants that introduced them to cocoa beans. They then sailed along Central America, across modern-day Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and Panama. They continued talking with natives, trying to learn of any riches or of the strait. They were told of a wealthy province 200 miles to the west called Ciguare. In April 1503, having been unable to find the Strait of Malacca, Columbus and his men left for Cuba. On his way back, on May 10 he sighted the Cayman Islands. He named them Las Tortugas ("the turtles") after the turtles they found on the islands.

In June, they were hit by another storm and were forced back to Jamaica, where they were stranded. Nicolás de Ovando, the governor sent to replace Bobadilla, hated Columbus and refused to help him. Columbus and his men had to fend for themselves on Jamaica. Their greatest immediate concern was convincing the natives to not attack them. Columbus tricked them into believing he had divine powers by predicting a lunar eclipse for February 29, 1504, which he had read in an astronomy almanac. In May, some of the men mutinied, which culminated in a swordfight between Bartholomew Columbus and the mutiny's leader, Francisco de Porras. Columbus won, but spared the mutineers. On June 29, a caravel sent by Ovando arrived, over a year after Columbus' men were shipwrecked. They continued to be battered by storms back to Santo Domingo. On September 11, Columbus left for Spain, having failed in his mission. This was Columbus' last voyage. He would never return to the West Indies, and would die two years after he returned.


Title: Encomienda System
Description: The encomienda system was a labor system developed by the Spanish Crown for indigenous Americans. Spaniards, usually conquistadores after successful conquests, received a group of indigenous forced laborers tied to a plot of land. The encomienda's recipient, called encomenderos, did not necessarily own the land itself, but they could dictate the laborers. The laborers were involuntary but were paid wages. When established, encomenderos could hold their encomiendas indefinitely, and could pass them onto their heirs. It was important for maintaining Spain's colonies in their early days, particularly for growing cash crops.

The system originated in Spain following the Reconquista, to organize the defeated Moors. It was moved to the New World in 1503 by Hispaniola Governor Nicolás de Ovando, who took it to a much larger scale. It was later implemented in other Spanish colonies, like Peru, Mexico, and the Philippines. 

The encomienda system was almost immediately subject to controversy in Spain. Reports came out of encomenderos abusing, even executing the laborers. In 1519, the Taíno cacique (chief), Enriquillo, led a large rebellion because of the Spanish conquest and enslavement through the encomienda system. The King and Queen of Spain abhorred mistreatment of the natives, having legally recognized them as subjects of the Spanish Crown and so expecting them to be treated as any other (lower-class) subject. They implemented various laws intended to protect the natives and prosecute abusive encomenderos, such as the Laws of Burgos (1512) and the New Laws (1542). These laws were strongly opposed by the Spanish colonists. When the Viceroy of Peru tried to implement the New Laws, the colonists rebelled and killed him. The Viceroy of Mexico, hearing this, refused to implement the laws out of fear.

The New Laws of 1542 intended to replace the encomienda system with the repartimiento system. This was supposed to be more lenient on the native laborers and granted them more protections. The encomenderos who killed the Viceroy of Peru were executed, and the New Laws were installed throughout the empire. Encomiendas declined, but remained for centuries. It lasted until 1782 in southern Chile, where it a revolt broke out seventy years before over the severity of the encomenderos' abuses. The removal spread to the rest of Chile in 1789, and the Spanish Empire abolished it everywhere two years later.

The encomienda system managed the native labor in the Spanish colonies for decades. It facilitated the early growth of the colonial economies. Thousands of natives were forced into labor until their deaths, and were often treated badly enough to spark revolts.


Title: Christopher Columbus dies
Description: After a final voyage ending in 1504, Columbus returned to Spain. Along the way back, he suffered from an illness, possibly reactive arthritis. This illness weakened him, and when he arrived in Spain he would live on for just two more years. His last acts were to demand that he be given one tenth of all the riches and goods from the newly-discovered lands as he had been promised a decade ago. The Spanish Crown declined, reminding him that he had been removed as governor and so was not entitled to his rewards anymore. Columbus refused to accept defeat. He followed the royal court as it moved around Spanish cities, maintaining his demands. On May 20, 1506, he died at 54 years old in Valladolid, Spain. Columbus died believing that he had found a westward route to Asia. A year later, the continents were instead named in honor of Amerigo Vespucci, who had recognized them as separate from Asia.

Despite his disgrace in 1500, Columbus reMained wildly popular after his death. He was regarded as a founding figure of the New World by its later inhabitants. Various locations were named after Columbus and the feminized form of his name, "Columbia." These include Columbia, South Carolina (a state capital), Columbus, Ohio (another state capital), the Columbia River, the District of Columbia, British Columbia, the Republic of Colombia, and various other cities. Columbia was often used to refer to the United States as an entity. Various countries, including the United States, Spain, and Italy, celebrate October 12 as Columbus Day. He is generally credited with being the first European to discover the Americas, though in recent times his legacy has diminished for various reasons. These include the discovery of Leif Erikson's voyage in 1000, his cruelty to natives, and his own belief that he had landed in Asia.


Title: Taíno population drops to 60,000
Description: 


Title: <i>Universalis Cosmographia</i>
Description: The earliest known usage of the name "America" to refer to the New World was found on the Waldseemüller Map, or the <i>Universalis Cosmographia</i>. It referred to modern-day South America. It was named after Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci, who discovered that the Americas were a landmass separate from Asia, contrary to what Columbus believed.

Larger image: 
https://bit.ly/2SqlqW7


Title: Sebastian Cabot searches for the Northwest Passage
Description: Sebastian Cabot was a Venetian explorer and the son of John Cabot, the first European to land in North America since Leif Erikson in 1000. Like his father, Sebastian Cabot was interested in sailing west. In the early 16th century, European explorers were just beginning to chart the North and South American mainland. Their main goal was still to find a western sea route to Asia, but it seemed everywhere they tried sailing, they were stopped by land. The prevailing theory was that there was a passage to the northwest that would take them through the Americas and to Asia. Sebastian Cabot was sent on one of the first missions to find the Northwest Passage by King Henry VII of England in 1508. He sailed north of Newfoundland, where his father had landed a decade earlier, and explored the northwest of North America. He sailed around the coast of what is now Labrador and the northern coast of Quebec. He went as far as Hudson Bay, where he was forced to turn around. He then sailed down the coast, around Newfoundland and down what is now the US east coast. He sailed until he was "almost in the latitude of Gibraltar" and "almost the longitude of Cuba," which would place him near Chesapeake Bay. He sailed back to England in 1509, arriving soon after the death of King Henry VII. 


Title: Caparra, Puerto Rico founded
Description: Juan Ponce de León was a Spanish explorer and conquistador who played a role in early Spanish presence in the New World. He arrived as a soldier of the Spanish Crown in Hispaniola soon after Christopher Columbus discovered the island. Around the middle of the early 1500s he learned of a bountiful land of a nearby island. That island was Puerto Rico, discovered by Columbus in 1493, who called it San Juan Bautista. In 1508, Ponce de León was ordered by King Ferdinand II of Aragon to explore and colonize the island. On July 12, he took fifty men to San Juan Bay. Two miles inland, he built a storehouse. This was the first settlement in what would become Caparra, the first European-built settlement in Puerto Rico. He gathered a fair amount of gold, and was rewarded with a governorship of the island.


Title: Diego Velázquez de Cuéller's conquest of Cuba
Description: Diego Velázquez de Cuéller was a Spanish conquistador from the early 16th century. In 1509, Christopher Columbus' son, Diego, became the Governor of the Indies. This put him in charge of all Spanish holdings in the New World. Officially, this included Cuba, Jamaica, Hispaniola, Puerto Rico, and part of the continent, but practically the Spanish only controlled part of Hispaniola from Santo Domingo. As such, King Ferdinand II of Spain ordered Columbus to explore and conquer the neighboring island of Cuba. Columbus designated Velázquez as the leader of this expedition, who was to raise the money for it himself.

He set off in January of 1511 with 300 men, landing in the northeast. Notable members included future conquistadors Hernán Cortés and Pedro de Alvarado, as well as friar Bartolomé de las Casas. Velázquez found a force of hostile Taínos led by Hatuey, a Hispaniolan cacique (chief). Hatuey had fled from Hispaniola just before Velázquez with 400 men, warning that the Spanish would conquer Cuba like they had done to Hispaniola and implored the Cuban caciques to join him in resisting them. He showed the Cubans a bag of jewels and said,

"Here is the God the Spanish worship. For these they fight and kill; for these they persecute us and that is why we have to throw them into the sea... They tell us, these tyrants, that they adore a God of peace and equality, and yet they usurp our land and make us their slaves. They speak to us of an immortal soul and of their eternal rewards and punishments, and yet they rob our belongings, seduce our women, violate our daughters. Incapable of matching us in valor, these cowards cover themselves in an iron our weapons cannot break."

This speech was not enough to convince the caciques to join him. Hatuey instead waged a guerrilla campaign, and was able to hold out for several months but was ultimately unsuccessful. His men were only able to kill less than a dozen Spaniards. On February 2, 1512, Hatuey was captured and burned at the stake.

Along with his second-in-command, Pánfilo de Narváez, Velázquez expanded Spanish presence across Cuba for the next few years. The last major resistance the Spanish found came in 1513. They fought 2500 Taínos led by Chief Caguax, who were defeated. The King of Spain then authorized Velázquez to create encomiendas and create new settlements. Velázquez would spend the next few years authorizing searches for gold and constructions of new towns. The most important of these was Havana, built in 1514. Havana would go on to become the largest city and capital of Cuba, which it remains to this day. The next year, he built Santiago, which would become the contemporary capital and is today the second-largest city on the island. The Spanish conquest of Cuba would last for centuries, ending only after the Spanish-American War of 1898.


Title: Laws of Burgos
Description: The Laws of Burgos were a series of 35 laws passed by the Spanish Crown regulating Spanish treatment of indigenous Americans. The Spanish Crown were horrified at the mistreatment of the natives by the Spanish encomenderos. The Crown saw the natives as Spanish subjects, and so were not people to be abused. The Laws of Burgos declared that the Indians should be paid, not in money but in clothes and furniture. They were to own their own cottages on their own land. They formalized the encomienda system, in which Spaniards were granted native laborers to work on some land. The Indians were to plant the crops and raise the livestock. The Spaniards were to teach the Indians Christianity, building a church for them and periodically testing them on their religious knowledge. One Indian boy for every fifty in an encomienda was to learn reading, writing, and Catholicism from the Spaniards, then teach the rest of the encomienda. Sick Indians were to be taken to priests, and dead Indians were to be buried with a cross near the church. Indians in encomiendas were to search for gold for five months every year, then be allowed to rest for forty days after. Spaniards were to feed them well and let them perform their dances. Polygamy and adultery, as Catholic sins, were abolished. Pregnant Indians were not to be worked in the mines or fields, up to three years after their baby is born. Indians could not change encomenderos, so they could not be sold like later African-American slaves. An encomendero could not physically or verbally abuse their Indians, and could own no more than forty Indians per encomienda, and no more than 150 Indians total. Royally-appointed inspectors were to investigate encomenderos every six months to ensure they were complying with the laws. On July 28, 1513, the laws were amended. Now, Indian children did not have to do adult work until the age of fourteen, and Indians in encomiendas were free after two years, being assumed to be full Christians at that point.

While the Laws of Burgos were intended to protect Indians against abuses, it was not widely accepted. Advocates of Indian rights objected to its legalization of the encomienda system, which previously was not official imperial policy. There was of course strong resistance from encomenderos themselves. Thirty years later, the Spanish Crown would pass another series of reforms, called the New Laws, designed to protect the Indians even further.


Title: Juan Ponce de León's voyage to Florida
Description: Juan Ponce de León was a Spanish conquistador and explorer from the early 16th century. In 1508, he was granted the governorship of Puerto Rico, then called San Juan Bautista. Three years later, his governorship was revoked after losing a legal dispute to Diego Columbus, the son of Christopher Columbus. Columbus was Governor of the Indies, which granted him control over all of the Indies, including Puerto Rico. In February of 1512, King Ferdinand II of Spain suggested that Ponce de León explore more of the Caribbean. Any new land he discovered would be his for life, free of Columbus' control, but he was to pay for the exploration and settlement himself. Ponce de León is often stated to have been searching for the Fountain of Youth, but this is untrue, and is an idea that only surfaced after his death.

On March 4, 1513, Ponce de León left Puerto Rico with 200 men, sailing northwest to the Bahamas. On March 27, they discovered new land. At the time, they thought it was another island, but it is now believed to be the mainland. Ponce de León called it La Florida, meaning "The Flower," after its landscape. Its name is also derived from the Spanish name for Easter, Pascua Florida, meaning "the Festival of Flowers." March 27, 1513, the day they discovered the land, was Easter Sunday. 

On April 8, they encountered a powerful current. This was the Gulf Stream, which is strongest between the Bahamas and Florida, where Ponce de León was. The Spanish would use this current to launch their ships out of the Caribbean towards Europe. On May 4, they reached and named Biscayne Bay, in the southeast of the Florida peninsula. They sailed around the peninsula's tip and through the Florida Keys. On May 23, they stepped onto the Florida mainland. It is not certain where exactly they landed, though somewhere around Charlotte Harbor is the most likely. This was the last point of note in their expedition, after which they returned to Puerto Rico.

Ponce de León is often credited with discovering Florida, but this is unlikely. The Cantino Map, over ten years prior, shows a peninsula near Cuba like Florida, suggesting that someone else had already been there.


Title: Juan Ponce de León lands in Florida
Description: See "Juan Ponce de León's voyage to Florida."


Title: Vasco Núñez de Balboa travels to the Pacific Ocean
Description: Vasco Núñez de Balboa was a Spanish explorer from the early 16th century. In December 1511 King Ferdinand II of Spain made him interim governor of Darién, a Spanish colony on the Isthmus of Panama. The Spanish were told by the local Indians of an ocean to the south and a vast empire of riches. These referred to the Pacific Ocean and the Inca Empire, respectively. Balboa was unable to lead the force sent to conquer the empire, but he did lead the expedition to find the Pacific Ocean (then called the South Sea). He set off with 190 Spaniards and a few hundred Indians on September 1, 1513. They crossed through the thick jungle for several weeks. On September 25, they sighted the ocean, but were unable to proceed due to bad weather. The party left and arrived in Santa María, a colonial city in modern-day Colombia, in January 1514. This was the first time a European had ever seen the Pacific Ocean from the east side.


Title: Santiago, Cuba founded
Description: Santiago de Cuba was the fifth town founded by Spaniards during their initial conquest of Cuba. It was founded in 1515, close to the southernmost point on the island. Over time, it grew into a city, and became the capital of the colony of Cuba in 1522. In 1563, the Governor of Cuba moved his residence from Santiago to Havana, unofficially relocating the capital there. In 1589, that relocation was made official, but Santiago reMained as one of the island's largest and influential cities. Today, it is the second-largest city in Cuba, behind Havana.


Title: Havana, Cuba founded
Description: Havana was the sixth town the Spaniards built in Cuba. The name "Havana" actually belonged to several towns, most of which failed soon after establishment. The original Havana was built in 1514 or 1515 on the island's southern coast. It was relocated several years later because they determined that a bay on the island's north coast was more suitable for a port town. This port, then known as el Puerto de Carenas, was situated at the mouth of the Gulf of Mexico, allowing easy access to the mainland. It also sat adjacent to the Gulf Stream, a powerful current that Europeans used as a launcher to propel their ships into the Atlantic Ocean to begin their voyage to Europe. As such, the bay was a natural point for sailors to resupply before heading off.

Havana's full name was San Cristóbal de la Habana. San Cristóbal, or Saint Christopher, was to be the city's patron saint. Habana, anglicized to Havana, is of unknown origin. Upon its founding, it was used as a base of operations to move from the Caribbean to the mainland. In the mid-16th century, the Spanish Crown ordered a large fleet together to protect transAtlantic merchant vessels from pirates. This fleet was to set up base in the bay near Havana. The town's commerce and population began to expand, growing into the most prominent city on the island. In 1563, the Governor of Cuba moved his residence to Havana, unofficially designating it as the island's capital. By the end of the century, the Spanish Crown had designated Havana "the key to the New World and Rampart of the Indies." Havana would go on to become the official capital of the colony, and later the nation of Cuba, as well as its largest city, both of which it remains to this day.


Title: Bartolomé de las Casas becomes Protector of the Indians
Description: Bartolomé de las Casas was a Spanish friar from the early 16th century. In 1502 he arrived in Hispaniola with soon-to-be-governor Nicolás de Ovando. Las Casas became a slave owner. In 1510, a group of Dominican friars arrived in Santo Domingo and were appalled at the mistreatment the Indians suffered at the hands of their masters. They fervently preached against Indian slavery, accusing the colonists of slaughtering and oppressing the Indians. They decided to deny slave owners like Las Casas from confession, a great affront to a Catholic, especially a friar like Las Casas. Diego Columbus, Governor of the Indies, complained to the authorities back in Spain, and the friars were expelled. Many of the colonists, including Las Casas, supported this.

In 1513, Las Casas joined Diego Velázquez's conquest of Cuba as a chaplain. He witnessed the Spanish commit atrocities, like massacring the Taínos led by Hatuey. The conquest saw Las Casas enriched with a lavish encomienda, but it also drove him to ponder their treatment of the Indians. In 1514, after studying the Bible, Las Casas concluded that what the Spanish had done to the Indians was a grave evil. He released his slaves and gave up his encomienda, and preached to others to do the same. When he was unsuccessful, he left for Spain to advocate for the Indians there.

He was able to secure a meeting with King Ferdinand himself, but the monarch was too ill to meet him and died in 1516. He was succeeded by a young Prince Charles, who was supported by Cardinal Ximenez Cisneros. Las Casas informed Cisneros of the situation in the Indies. The cardinal responded strongly, and granted Las Casas the position of Protector of the Indians. He was to be paid 100 pesos a year, and was tasked with ensuring the fair treatment of the Indians. He was to be assisted by three monks, who sailed with him to Santo Domingo. The monks realized that all the encomenderos were rich and powerful, and were unwilling to give ther encomiendas up. As such, they did not do much to change the situation. Las Casas was incensed, and accused the monks of being complicit in the Indians' oppression.

Though this venture was unsuccessful, Las Casas took his position as Protector of the Indians to heart, and would dedicate the rest of his life to improving their condition.


Title: <i>Ninety-Five Theses</i>
Description: The Ninety-Five Theses were a series of criticisms written by German theology professor Martin Luther. He lambasted the Catholic Church for its corruption. Chief among these criticisms was the concept of indulgences, in which a sinner could pay a Church official to reduce their punishment for their sin. Luther was a long-standing opponent of indulgences, believing that repentance was the way to salvation, not bribery.

The first thesis begins with, "When our Lord and Master Jesus Christ said, 'Repent,' he willed the entire life of believers to be one of repentance." He wrote that the pope alone could not grant salvation, denied that the pope had any control over purgatory, and denounced indulgences as sinful.

Luther's intent with his theses was likely to provoke an academic debate and hopefully a reformation. What happened instead was a veritable religious revolution. They began the Reformation, in which many Christians broke from the Catholic Church to form a new denomination. They were called Protestants, as the denomination was created in protest of church corruption. This was not a peaceful break; Europe erupted into chaos and warfare. Protestants and Catholics fought for control throughout the 16th century. The Catholics were largely successful in maintaining their influence, but the Protestants were able to make some headway. Notably, Protestantism became influential in England. In 1534, King Henry VIII broke with the Catholic Church. He formed the Church of England, which practiced Anglicanism, a kind of Protestantism. Conflict between Catholics and Protestants would continue in England for centuries. Most of the English colonists arriving in North America were Protestant, and soon the religion became integral to much of colonial American culture. It would go on to shape much of American society and law, and continue to create social strife against Catholics. Today, Protestantism remains the majority religion in the US.


Title: Conquest of the Aztec Empire
Description: The Aztec Empire was a powerful civilization based in Mesoamerica. Though it was a wealthy empire that enriched its subjects and its neighbors with its abundant natural resources and extensive trade routes, it was also famously brutal. The Aztecs conquered its neighbors centuries prior and made them vassals. They also had rival states who were always looking for an opportunity to become the dominant power in the region. So, when a powerful newcomer in the form of the Spanish arrived in the early 16th century, some of those disgruntled vassals and wary rivals allied with them in order to defeat their old enemy.

Leading the Spanish force was Hernán Cortés. Cortés had arrived in the New World in 1504 when he was 18 years old. He was a lesser noble, and so was given a plot of land and an encomienda by Governor of the Indies Nicolás de Ovando. In 1511, Cortés joined the conquest of Cuba, serving under Diego Velázquez. Velázquez was impressed by Cortés' exploits in Cuba and made him his right-hand man. However, relations between the two turned sour, partly because of Cortés' ambitions and partly because Cortés was courting Velázquez's sister-in-law. When Cortés became aware of the coming plans to conquer Mesoamerica, he begged and pleaded with Velázquez to get back in his good books. Velázquez, being too old and fat to lead a conquest, reluctantly agreed to put Cortés in charge, but quickly changed his mind. He was too slow; Cortés quickly assembled the army and left for the mainland in February 1519. He led a force of 500 soldiers, 13 horses, and a few cannons. Despite having little military experience, Cortés was a quick study, and won a number of small, early victories against some coastal Indians that gave his men confidence. In modern-day Tabasco, Mexico, he defeated a band of natives, captured twenty young women, and converted them all. Among these was a woman the Spanish called Doña Maria, who later became known as La Malinche. Malinche could speak both Nahuatl, the language of the Aztecs, and Chontal Maya. Geronimo de Aguilar, a Franciscan priest under Cortés' command, could speak Chontal Maya and Spanish. Through the two, Cortés was able to communicate with the Aztecs.


Title: Hernán Cortés discovers Tenochtitlán
Description: Spanish explorer Hernán Cortés became the first European to discover a major Native American civilization. He happens upon Tenochtitlán, the capital of the Aztec empire. Though the Aztecs were easily the most powerful and fearsome people in the area, Cortés would quickly conquer the city with the help of Native American allies and smallpox.


Title: Alonso Álvarez de Pineda explores the Gulf of Mexico
Description: 


Title: Ferdinand Magellan's circumnavigation
Description: 


Title: Cholula Massacre
Description: 


Title: Alvarado Massacre
Description: 


Title: City of San Juan, Puerto Rico founded
Description: 


Title: Ferdinand Magellan killed
Description: 


Title: New Spain established
Description: 


Title: Spanish conquest of the Maya
Description: 


Title: Council of the Indies formed
Description: 


Title: Giovanni da Verrazano explores the east coast of North America
Description: 


Title: San Miguel de Gualdape, Georgia founded
Description: 


Title: Pánfilo de Narváez' failed expedition to Florida
Description: 


Title: <i>History of the Indies</i>
Description: 


Title: Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca explores Texas, Arizona, and New Mexico
Description: 


Title: Francisco Pizarro conquers the Incas
Description: 


Title: Church of England formed
Description: 


Title: Jacques Cortier explores the Gulf of St. Lawrence
Description: 


Title: Viceroys delegated to control New Spain
Description: 


Title: <i>Institutes of the Christian Religion</i>
Description: 


Title: Napituca Massacre
Description: 


Title: Hernando de Soto explores southeastern North America
Description: 


Title: Discovery of the Grand Canyon by Garcia Lopez de Cardenas
Description: 


Title: Mabila Massacre
Description: 


Title: Münster map
Description: The map drawn by Sebastian Münster was the first to name the body of water to the west of the Americas the Pacific Ocean.


Title: Pedro de Tovar explores Arizona
Description: 


Title: Francisco Vásquez de Coronado explores Kansas and the American Southwest
Description: 


Title: Jesuit Order established
Description: 


Title: Tiguex War
Description: 


Title: Hernando de Soto discovers the Mississippi River
Description: 


Title: Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo explores the Californian coast
Description: 


Title: New Laws
Description: 


Title: Valladolid debate
Description: 


Title: <i>A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies</i>
Description: 


Title: Coronation of Elizabeth I of England
Description: 


Title: Reign of Queen Elizabeth I
Description: 


Title: Colony at Santa Maria de Ochuse established
Description: 


Title: Tristán de Luna y Arellano explores Pensacola Bay
Description: 


Title: Ochuse colony destroyed by hurricane
Description: 


Title: Francisco de Ibarra explores New Mexico
Description: 


Title: Jean Ribault colonizes Florida
Description: 


Title: Fort Caroline built
Description: 


Title: Saint Augustine founded
Description: St. Augustine was the first permanent European colony in mainland America.


Title: Pedro Menéndez de Avilés captures Fort Caroline
Description: 


Title: Pedro Menéndez de Avilés slaughters French Huguenots at Fort Caroline
Description: 


Title: Dominique de Gourges slaughters Spaniards at Fuerte San Mateo
Description: 


Title: Mission Santa Maria at Ajacan established
Description: 


Title: Sir Martin Frobisher explores Baffin Bay and the Hudson Strait
Description: 


Title: Sir Francis Drake's circumnavigation
Description: 


Title: Sir Humphrey Gilbert's failed voyage to Newfoundland
Description: Sir Humphrey Gilbert was a nobleman from England who in 1578 was authorized to start the first ever English New World colony. On September 26, he set off from Dartmouth with a large fleet, but was forced into Plymouth by storms for several weeks, forcing him to postpone the expedition. He would make another attempt five years later, leaving Plymouth on June 11, 1583 and arriving at St. John's, Newfoundland on August 3. He sailed back for England to officially record his claim, but sunk into the ocean alog with his boat partway through, and so his colony ended before it began. While his voyage may have been a failure, it did mark the first time any Englishman attempted to settle in the New World. More importantly, Gilbert's actions inspired his half-brother, Sir Walter Raleigh, to begin his own, slightly more successful, colonial adventure.


Title: <i>A Discourse Concerning Western Planting</i>
Description: <i>A Discourse Concerning Western Planting</i> was a document written by Richard Hakluyt that attempted to convince English Queen Elizabeth I to support the establishment of New World colonies. Hakluyt was one of the only advocates of such an undertaking in England at the time, and was not deterred by Sir Humphrey Gilbert's recent failure to colonize Newfoundland. The document contains 23 reasons for establishing a colony, which include the following:

1) The soil is rich and can produce many valuable commodities
2) The trip from Europe to the New World and back is relatively short and easy (Gilbert's death notwithstanding)
 These points included converting Native Americans to Protestantism, freeing the same people from the 'evil' clutches of Catholicism wrought by the Spanish, creating jobs overseas, reducing commerce between England and Spain (as they could trade with their colonies instead), and just in general sticking it to the Spanish.

Full Text
https://bit.ly/2StRXzs


Title: Philip Amadas and Arthur Barlowe explore the coast of North Carolina
Description: 


Title: Sir Walter Raleigh receives patent to explore and settle in North America
Description: 


Title: Roanoke Colony founded
Description: The first English colony in America, established on Roanoke Island near modern-day North Carolina, was founded by Sir Walter Raleigh. About 100 colonists were sent to the colony, mostly young men in the military, to conduct raids on Spanish ships. They left the next year, and were replaced by another 100 colonists, this time seeking to establish a permanent settlement. It would not last, as 5 years later it was found completely and mysteriously deserted.


Title: First Asians arrive in North America
Description: 


Title: First Englishman born in the New World
Description: 


Title: Defeat of the Spanish Armada
Description: 


Title: Roanoke Colony is found deserted
Description: John White returned to Roanoke Island off the coast of North Carolina to discover that all the inhabitants had mysteriously disappeared. The word "Croaton" was found inscribed on a nearby tree. To this day, it is still unknown what became of them, though it remains the most likely possibility that they left to live with American Indians.


Title: Juanillo's Revolt
Description: 


Title: Juan de Archuleta explores Colorado
Description: 


Title: Colony of Santa Fe de Nuevo Mejico at San Juan de los Caballeros
Description: Juan de onate salazar founds colony of santa fe de nuevo mejico at san Juan de los caballeros


Title: Ácoma Massacre
Description: 


Title: Sandia Mountains Massacre
Description: 


Title: Bartholomew Gosnold explores Cape Cod and Martha's Vineyard
Description: 


Title: Samuel de Champlain explores the St. Lawrence River and eastern Canada
Description: In 1602, French Admiral Aymar de Chaste was given the job of re-establishing the French fur trade in New France. On his voyage over, he was accompanied by French explorer Samuel de Champlain, who would go on to become an important figure in the foundation of Canada. Upon arriving, Champlain joined a fur-trading expedition with François Gravé Du Pont, who taught the explorer about navigating the area. Champlain learned about the Saint Lawrence River, the primary waterway in the region, and about relations with the Indians. During the expedition, Champlain mapped the river and established good relations with the Montagnai Indians, who lived in the area. He sent an account of his journey back home, and joined a second expedition in the spring of 1604. This one was headed by Pierre Dugua de Mons, who was to take over the fur trading business in New France. They eventually settled on an area across the bay from the Saint Croix River in an area that would later be called Acadia (now Nova Scotia). They established a settlement, Port Royal, which Champlain would use as a base to explore the area from. After exploring much of the coast, reaching as far south as Cape Cod, Champlain and Dugua decided the best location for the outpost would be


Title: Reign of King James I
Description: 


Title: Acadia charter
Description: 


Title: Port Royal established as the capital of French Acadia
Description: 


Title: George Weymouth explores New England
Description: 


Title: Virginia Company chartered
Description: Throughout the 16th century, people all across Europe had heard tales from Spanish and Portuguese explorers and settlers of the vast riches in the New World. The two empires were profiting immensely from the trade produced by their new colonies, so it was natural that others would want to join in on colonialism, too. One such contender was England. She was far from the most powerful kingdom in Europe, and was usually too bogged down in wars with Scotland in France to pursue colonialist efforts. She had made a few half-hearted attempts in the late 16th century; Sir Humphrey Gilbert died before he could even build a settlement, and Sir Walter Raleigh's colony on Roanoke Island mysteriously disappeared within a few years of its creation.

In the early 17th century, though, with the conclusion of war with Scotland in 1603 and with pushing from colonialist supporters like Richard Hakluyt, King James I of England made a third attempt at establishing an English presence in the New World. The effort was to be conducted by the Virginia Company, chartered ad hoc on April 10, 1606. Its name comes from Queen Elizabeth I of England, whose nickname was "the virgin queen." The entity was divided into two competing groups: the Plymouth Company was to settle in the north of North America, and the London Company was to take the south. Specifically, Plymouth was granted all land between the 38th and 45th parallels, reaching inland 100 miles, and London was granted the land between the 34th and 41st parallels, also up to 100 miles inland. This produced three degrees of overlap, prompting the additional rule that within that area, neither company was to build a settlement within 100 miles of any already made by the other company.

Both companies landed their first settlers in May the next year, Plymouth with Popham Colony in modern-day Maine and London with Jamestown in modern-day Virginia. While Popham would quickly turn into another English colonial failure, Jamestown would, barely, survive and manage to turn a profit, keeping the London Company in business. However, the Indian Massacre of 1622 saw the death of nearly all of the Jamestown colonists, which was an embarrasment for King James, who had chartered the colony. After a period of debate, he disbanded the London Company and made Virginia a royal colony, which would go on to see success for decades later.


Title: Henry Hudson explores New York and the Hudson River
Description: 


Title: Popham colony
Description: Popham Colony was one of the first colonies established by the English. Specifically, it was built by the Plymouth Company, one of the competing arms of the Virginia Company, who was tasked with buidling a settlement on the northeastern coast of North America. They built it on the mouth of the Kennebec River in modern-day Maine on May 4, 1607, a few days before their rival, the London Company, established their colony of Jamestown. While Popham may have beaten Jamestown for the settlement date, it would lose in longevity, as it was abandoned in July the next year, putting the Plymouth Company out of business. Though, one point of note about Popham is that in order to leave, the colonists built the first ever constructed in North America. Besides that, Popham is little more than a footnote in English-American colonial history, overshadowed by its more successful sister, Jamestown.


Title: <b>Colony of Jamestown founded</b>
Description: The first permanent English settlement in the New World, Jamestown, was founded by John Smith of the Virginia Company for the purposes of finding gold. It was mainly composed of the poor who had fled England because of discrimination. 104 settlers arrived in 1607. They suffered from a variety of diseases, including malaria, typhoid, and dysentery. Their numbers rose to 400 in 1609 after a new shipment of colonists, but was succeeded by a harsh winter referred to as the "starving time," in which all but 65 settlers died. Smith ruled with an iron fist to keep the colonists working so that they May have had enough to eat, but was forced to leave after being injured in a gunpowder explosion.

Nevertheless, it would go on to become a successful town until its destruction in 1676.

Jamestown was the first permanent English settlement in the New World. It was founded by the London Company, a division of the Virginia Company, created on April 10, 1606. King James I of England had heard of the vast amounts of gold, silver, and other riches the Spanish had taken during their conquest of the New World, and hoped to take some of the riches for himself. Attempts in the 1580s had failed, but the tales of vast wealth were too alluring to resist. The Virginia Company was chartered with this intention, sending its first wave of settlers across the Atlantic Ocean in December.

105 men set sail from Blackwall aboard the Godspeed, the Discovery, and the Susan Constant. It took them four months to arrive at the coast, unusually long even for the time. One crew member died on the way over. In April 1607, the remaining 104 men sailed along the coast, naming Cape Henry and Cape Charles. They made their first landing on April 26 on Cape Henry, but did little more than plant a cross. They returned to their ships to prepare to launch their settlement officially. They opened sealed letters sent from the Virginia Company in London, which outlined plans for a council that was to govern the settlement. It named eight members, including the captains of each of the three ships. Another member was John Smith. This was lucky for Smith, as on the voyage over he had been arrested for mutiny and sentenced to be hanged upon arrival. With these orders was able to get a pardon from Christopher Newport, captain of the Susan Constant and now a fellow council member.

The settlers decided that their settlement was to be atop a peninsula they named Jamestown, after King James. Its location made it a good spot to defend against French, Spanish, and Dutch attacks, which were a concern. It was also uninhabited, so there were no Indians or European settlers to fight over it. Finally, it sported a harbor deep enough to anchor the ships, but shallow enough for a quick and easy departure. Settlement was to begin immediately, but just as immediately problems arose. The prospective settlers were aristocrats and were not used to manual labor. The peninsula's uninhabited status also did not prevent a party of Paspahegh Indians rowing in from the mainland to attack the new settlers, killing one ad wounding eleven. Nevertheless, construction on James Fort, their first building, continued, and was finished on June 15. It guarded a storehouse, church, and a few houses. During this time, the settlers also began gathering precious stones and metals like gold from the area. In late June, Captain Newport left for London with their bounty.

While he was out, the settlers began running into more trouble. Though its isolation from the mainland made it easily defensible, the peninsula also had limited game for hunting. The area was also covered in marsh, which supported malaria-carrying mosquitoes. To make matters worse, the James River, the only water source around, was brackish and contaminated with dysentery. Over 135 settlers died from malaria, at the time over 80% of the colony's population. Meanwhile, upon arriving in England he realized that the "gold" he had transported all the way over was in fact worthless iron pyrite. Unperturbed, he sailed back for Jamestown with seventy new colonists and some more provisions. Those provisions turned out to not be enough, and to make matters worse, James Fort burned down soon after Newport arrived.

Newport set out once again for supplies, coming back on October 1, 1608. He brought another seventy settlers, including the first women (though only two) and the first non-English settlers. The latter were workers whose jobs were essential to running the colony, as apparently the existing settlers couldn't handle it. Though all the English settlers were entitled the right to vote on the council members, the Polish workers were not. In response, they went on the first recorded strike in colonial America, and the council caved. The workers made products not just for the colonists to live on, but for export as well. However, it was not enough; Jamestown had been founded with the expectation of gold galore, and the colonists had little to show for over a hundred deaths.

Meanwhile, Smith, making good on his new lease on life, was working hard for his and his fellow colonists' survival. His chief concern was food, and was able to negotiate trade for it with several Indian tribes. One such venture in December 1607 went awry; Smith's party was ambushed and slaughtered by the Powhatan. Smith narrowly survived by using his Indian guide as a human shield, but was easily captured later by Opechancanough, Chief Powhatan's half-brother. Opechancanough decided to let Smith live after the settler gave him a compass. Instead, Smith was taken to the Powhatan seat of government at Werowocomoco on the York River. He was brought before Chief Powhatan himself. When Smith recounted the story seventeen years later, he describes how we was about to be executed, but was saved by the pleas of the chief's daughter, Pocahontas. This story is disputed, however, in part because he had never mentioned it in any previous accounts. By one way or another, Smith was released and rejoined Jamestown in early 1608.

In September 1609, the bag of gunpowder Smith was carrying on an expedition exploded, injuring him and forcing him back to England for treatment. Though one of Jamestown's hardest workers was now out of commission, it turned out to be fortuitous for the colony. While in England, Smith wrote two books detailing life in Jamestown in order to interest the public in the venture and hopefully get some more investments.


Title: Colonial Period
Description: 


Title: John Smith captured by Opechancanough
Description: In December of 1607, Captain John Smith of Jamestown was out seeking food along the Chickahominy River with an Indian guide and a few settlers. He was ambushed by Powhatan warriors led by Opechancanough, the chief's half-brother. They promptly killed the men accompanying Smith, but the captain himself narrowly escaped by using his Indian guide as a human shield. Smith waded into the river, trying to reach his boat to escape, but was overcome by the coldness of the water and was easily captured. In an attempt to spare his life, Smith gifted Opechancanough a compass, a piece of technology the Powhatan had never seen before. The Powhatan were fascinated with the movement of the compass needle that they could not touch. Smith took the opportunity to explain various scientific facts, such as the roundness of the earth and stars, and how the world contained many millions of diverse people. They were at this for an hour, before deciding to bring Smith to Orapaks, a small Powhatan village.

Here, Smith was treated quite well. He watched a variety of dances and was given plenty of food. When a Powhatan boy fell ill, Smith asked to go back to Jamestown to get him some medicine. The Powhatan denied him, instead deciding to raid the settlement. They asked Smith for advice on how to penetrate Jamestown's defenses, offering him riches in return. Smith tried to scare the Powhatan into canceling their raid by exaggerating the settlement's defenses with descriptions of "mines, great guns, and engines." They moved on Jamestown anyway, but retreated when faced when the settlement's soldiers come out to fight them.

The Powhatan then performed another elaborate, three-day ritual for Smith, who was eventually told was to determine if his intentions were friendly. He was then taken from Orapaks to Meronocomoco, where Chief Powhatan lived. Powhatan decided to execute Smith, but at the last second the chief's daughter, Pocahontas, jumped in to protect him. Powhatan called off the execution, and declared that he and Smith were now friends. He permitted Smith to go back to Jamestown to get supplies for a trade. Smith gave the Powhatan two cannons and a millstone, while Pocahontas made frequent trips to Jamestown to deliver provisions that saved the settlers from starvation.

Note that all of this information comes from an account Smith wrote in 1624. He is certainly biased, believing himself and Europeans in general to be superior to the "savage" Powhatan. He also almost definitely exaggerated many components of his story. A large reason for Smith writing this account was to drum up interest in England for the colonialist effort in order to get new settlers and supplies to Jamestown. Therefore, it was in his interest to make life there seem as interesting as possible. What Smith got right versus wrong, and where he told the honest truth, exaggerated, or even fabricated, is debated among historians. What is known for certain is that after this encounter, the relationship between the settlers and Powhatan improved, at least for a few years. It is also the chronologically earliest mention by Smith of Pocahontas, who would continue to play an important role in the town's early history.


Title: Jamestown supply missions
Description: Ever since Jamestown's establishment, it had been suffering from a lack of food and workers. A series of supply missions from England was meant to remedy this. The first came with the return of Captain Christopher Newport, who had traveled to England to sell the stores of gold the Virginians had unearthed. Upon the realization that his gold was in fact worthless iron pyrite, he began gathering new provisions and colonists. He recruited about 120 soon-to-be settlers, and arrived back in Jamestown on January 2, 1608. His arrival was well-timed, as the lack of planning and skills among the settlers, along with raids from the Powhatan, had diminished the colonial population from over a hundred to just 38.

Unfortunately, the supply mission also meant that they had 120 new mouth to feed. A daunting prospect, considering a few days later James Fort burned down, with all their provisions inside. The colonists had not set up sufficient farmland for growing food as it was. Nevertheless, Newport was able to whip the colony into shape. They rebuilt the fort and stationed guards around the crops. Newport himself decided to sail back to England. The colonists had found more gold, and were sure that it was real, unlike last time. This cargo was important, because if Jamestown could not show that it could turn a profit, the Virginia Company would go under, and the colony would not get any more supply missions. He departed on April 10, 1608, leaving over a hundred starving colonists behind. John Smith was able to secure some food from Indians, but it was not enough to save dozens of them from starvation.

On May 21, Newport arrived back in Jamestown. The good news was that he brought more supplies, as well as seventy new colonists. The bad news was that the gold turned out to be fake again, leaving the company's finances in jeopardy. Among the new settlers were the first women in Jamestown, all two of them. The first non-English settlers in Jamestown were also included, most likely from central Europe. They were skilled craftsmen, essential for much of the colonial effort. Among other things, they built a glass furnace, which would go on to become the first factory in America.

Newport was tasked with searching for the survivors of Roanoke Island, a colony whose inhabitants had mysteriously disappeared by 1590. He was also to search for more gold, and to crown Powhatan as a "sub-king" under King James I of England. Newport would fail in all three of these. Instead, he traveled back to England in January 1609, this time bearing non-precious metal products, like glass and tar. However, this was not enough to offset the company's losses, and the higher-ups were becoming increasingly frustrated that the settlers were failing to find the troves of gold and silver the Spanish were enjoying.

Around this time, Captain Samuel Argall of the London Company was tasked with finding a faster route to Jamestown. The usual route was to sail directly south from England to the tropics, then west with the trade winds, a journey of around three to five months. Argall instead sailed to the Azores, then west to Bermuda, then west to the Chesapeake Bay, a journey of about ten weeks. This new route had the added benefit of dodging hostile Spanish ships. This would save the company much time and money supplying the colonies. Upon arriving at Jamestown, Argall found the colonists once again on the brink of doom. This time, the culprit was a rat infestation, which had eaten all their stored corn. Argall gave the colonists much of his food, as well as news that the Virginia Company was being reorganized and that they would be sending a new governor to Jamestown, along with more supplies and settlers. Argall's supplies, while unexpected, would turn out to be critical for getting the colonists through the upcoming Starving Time.

On May 23, 1609, King James I of England made good on his promise. The Virginia Company was given a new charter, whose treasurer, Thomas Smythe, organized the largest supply mission yet. It sported nine ships bearing between 500 and 600 passengers, including women, children, and the new governor, Sir Thomas Gates. They also carried livestock and a year's worth of provisions, including for the new settlers. Newport, who was designated vice-admiral of the mission, was given control of the company's flagship, the Sea Venture. They set sail from Plymouth on June 2.

The suppliers would soon find that they would not be exempt from Jamestown's misfortune. A few diseases had snuck their way on board, including yellow fever, claiming the lives of 32 passengers. On July 25, the fleet encountered a powerful tempest that lasted for three days, seperating the nine ships. Seven of them found their way to the colony, the seventh arriving on October 3. The two holdouts were the Catch and the Sea Venture herself, who had been bearing most of the supplies and prominent passengers. After spending a few days dropping off their supplies, four of the ships returned to England, carrying Argall, Smith (who had been injured in a gunpowder explosion and needed treatment in England), and a few dozen more men. However, no new supply ships were sent for a year. Since most of the supplies had been on the Sea Venture, and the colonists had still not grown enough food for themselves, Jamestown was in dire straits by the winter of 1609.

But what became of the two ships that never made it to Jamestown, the Catch and the Sea Venture? The former was destroyed by the storm, but the flagship survived and was shipwrecked on the island of Bermuda. All 150 passengers and crew members survived the landing, and began salvaging supplies from the Sea Venture. The longboat accompanying the flagship was fitted with the Sea Venture's mast and sent with about ten sailors to find Jamestown, but they were never heard from again. The remaining survivors built two new ships out of the Sea Venture's scraps and local Bermuda wood. The two vessels, the Deliverance and the Patience, set sail on May 20, arriving in Jamestown three days later. They found the colonists all dead or dying. A combination of disease, starvation, and war with the Powhatan Confederacy had devastated the population. Of the 500 colonists living in Jamestown, only sixty remained, with most of those being sick and/or starving. The arrival of the old Sea Venture was of little comfort to the remaining colonists, as they brought 140 mouths to feed and little food to feed them with (most of the supplies had been lost at Bermuda). It was decided, likely by Gates, on June 7 to abandon the colony and sail back for England.

While all this was going on, Smith was keeping busy while recovering from his injuries in England. He wrote (exaggerated) accounts of his adventures in Jamestown. His wild tales of his capture by Opechancanough, the bizzare Powhatan rituals, and his rescue by Pocahontas drummed up enthusiasm among the English, securing investment in the Virginia Company. There was also organization by clergymen to aid the colonists as a humanitarian effort. These resulted in a fourth supply mission, headed by Thomas West, 3rd Baron De La Warr. West was to replace Gates as the governor. He also supplied 150 armed men to the fleet at his own expense. They departed on March 12, 1610, and arrived on June 9. Recall that Gates and the other colonists had decided to abandon Jamestown on June 7, just two days before West arrived. The two groups happpened to run into each other near Mulberry Island in the James River. West forced the group to turn back, which was not received well by the abandoners. Nevertheless, turn back they did, which turned out to be critical to the colony's success.

There would be more supply missions after this, but they were less necessary than in the first three years of Jamestown's existence. By 1610, the colonists were starting to get their acts together. Under Lord West's leadership, the Virginians were able to put up a fight against the Powhatan, and Rolfe's marriage with Pocahontas brought an end to the war. They began farming, trading with Indians, and expanding out from Jamestown. The governors maintained a tight but effective grip on the colony, and Rolfe's decision to plant tobacco saved the Virginia Company from bankruptcy. However, before all this Jamestown was starving, at war, and hurting for good leadership. At such a desperate time, the supply missions ensured that the colony would have a fighting chance. Once given that chance, Virginia would go from a dying town to a fully-fledged profitable colony.


Title: Quebec City founded
Description: 


Title: Second Virginia charter
Description: The second Virginia charter was mainly an expansion of the one written in 1606. Under that charter, the London Company was to colonize the central mid-Atlantic coast, while her sister the Plymouth Company was to take the northern mid-Atlantic. Since the Plymouth Company had gone bankrupt in 1608 and their only colony was abandoned, it was now time to reorganize. Virginia was given the authorization to colonize all land between 200 miles south of Cape Comfort and 200 miles north, approximately between the 34th and 40th parallels. She was also granted all land west of that region, "from sea to sea, west and northwest." This was done to generate excitement from investors, as having so much land to settle and so many natural resources to harvest would surely bring in money. This was important, as the new charter now also allowed merchants to invest in the Virginia Company, so attracting them was key. Despite the large land grant, Virginian settlers rarely traveled very far west, certainly not to the other end of the continent. Once English colonization developed, Virginia was given more reasonably-sized lands and the rest was awarded to other companies. The last point o f note was that in addition to a council, Virginia would be getting a new governor, who was given extensive powers that the Company hoped would straighten the colonists out. The first governor, Lord Delaware, would do just that. After over a decade of success and profit, in 1622 Virginia was suddenly nearly obliterated by a surprise Powhatan attack, forcing King James I of England to once again reorganize the colony, this time directly under the Crown to give it more protection.


Title: John Smith injured in a gunpowder explosion
Description: Jamestown was on the verge of collapse for the first several years of its existence, and John Smith was one of the key players who held it together. He was frequently out of town looking for and trading for food, the supply the Virginians needed above all else. He taught the colonists to fish and farm, and rallied them to work so that they May eat. So it was a great loss for the colony when in September of 1609 the gunpowder keg Smith was carrying suddenly exploded, injuring him. Smith's wounds could not be adequately treated at Jamestown, who lacked a proper doctor and was low on medical supplies. He was transported back to England the next month, and would never step foot in Virginia again.

But that did not mean he was done helping out the colonists. After recovering from his injury, he wrote several books detailing his adventures in Virginia, including the Generall Historie of Virginia in 1624 and The True Adventures and Observations of Captain John Smith in 1630. The former included the famous story of his capture by Opechancanough and rescue by Pocahontas. These exciting accounts created enthusiasm from investors about colonization. All the English had been hearing about before was how the English colonies all failed or were close to failing, so Smith's stories were a nice change of pace. These new investments paid for more supply missions that the colonists depended on.


Title: Starving Time
Description: 


Title: Colonial population is 350
Description: All colonists resided in Virginia, as this was the only one of the thirteen colonies that existed at this point.


Title: Palace of the Voernors built
Description: The Palace of the Voernors is built in Santa Fe. It is the oldest continuously occupied public building in the US.


Title: Santa Fe founded
Description: 


Title: Lord De La Warr's governorship of Virginia
Description: 


Title: Lord Delaware becomes Virginia governor
Description: Virginia was the fourth attempt by England to establish a New World colony, and for the first few years of its existence it seemed as if she would meet her predecessors' fates. Unsuitable skills, a lack of motivation and organization, starvation, Indian attacks, and disease had killed hundreds of settlers at a time when there were only hundreds of settlers. The worst of this was the Starving Time. The winter of 1608-09 saw Jamestown's population reduced from around 500 to just 61. King James I of England, who had chartered the Virginia Company to increase English prestige, spread Christianity, and make money, was disappointed that Virginia was doing none of these things. To rectify this, in 1609 he wrote a new charter, which among other things created the office of governor. This governor was to be powerful, and strict on the colonists. He would ensure that the survival effort was organized, that colonists would not slack off, that food would be grown, and that Powhatan attacks would be repulsed.

The Virginia Council nominated Thomas West, 3rd Baron De La Warr, better known as "Lord Delaware." He left England along with the latest supply mission on April 10, 1610, arriving two months later. He arrived just in time, as when he approached the James River, he found all of the remaining Virginians sailing back for England, having given up on the settlement entirely. Lord Delaware forced them to turn back, determined to save the colony. He immediately ordered George Somers and Samuel Argall to sail to Bermuda to food. While Somers was unsuccessful (and died in November), Argall was able to catch some fish at Cape Cod in modern-day Massachusetts. While on his way back, he came across a bay, which he named "Delaware" after the new governor. Both the river and state of Delaware are in turn named after this bay, though Lord Delaware himself never laid eyes on any of these.

The next month, Lord Delaware sent Thomas Gates and Christopher Newport to England to ask for more supply missions, and to bring news of the discovery of Bermuda. While they were out, he instructed the colonists to rebuild the church, which was a strong boost to morale. He also began building fortifications around Jamestown to protect it from the Powhatan. They built three: Fort Henry, Fort Algernon, and Fort Charles. We know little about these forts, but they seem to have not affected their defense much, since they were not manned.

Lord Delaware was particularly harsh when it came to Indian relations, even for his time. In July, he ordered Powhatan to return some weapons and English prisoners, which the Indian refused. Enraged, Lord Delaware ordered to cut off a hand of one of their own prisoners. The man was a Paspahegh, a small tributary of the Powhatan Confederacy. Powhatan still would not respond. A month later, Lord Delaware ordered an attack on the Paspahegh village. 70 Englishmen led by George Percy burned houses and crops and killed between 65 and 75. In a move that surprised even their contemporaries, they captured one of the chief's wives and her children, stabbed her, threw her children into the river and shot their brains out.


Title: First Anglo-Powhatan War
Description: A conflict between the colonists at Jamestown and the Powhatan Confederacy. It started after Governor Lord de la Warr attacked the Paspagegh tribe, who were part of the Confederacy. They killed several dozen, burning houses and cornfields, as well as kidnapping women and children. Colonists were attacked in retaliation near the Appomattox River. In 1611, Governor Sir Thomas Dale led several attacks against the Powhatan, and began to expand English territory to the surroundings of Jamestown. In April 1613, the English captured Chief Powhatan's daughter, Pocahontas, causing the tribe to sue for peace. Pocahontas was then married to colonist John Rolfe, making it the first interracial marriage in Virginia, and led to peace between the two peoples.


Title: Paspahegh Massacre
Description: 


Title: Dale's Code
Description: 


Title: Dutch fur trading center established on Manhattan Island
Description: 


Title: John Rolfe begins farming tobacco in Jamestown
Description: 


Title: New Netherland Colony chartered
Description: 


Title: Marriage of John Rolfe and Pocahontas
Description: 


Title: Smallpox outbreak amongst Northeast Indians
Description: 


Title: Headright system
Description: The headright system was implemented in Jamestown. Under this new policy, the Virginia Company would grant 50 acres of land to any who paid for their own or somebody else's passage to the colony. This attracted richer settlers, as well as poorer ones that had their passages paid for. Jamestown's population steadily grew as a result.


Title: <b>Virginia House of Burgesses established</b>
Description: The Virginia Company established the House of Burgesses to govern the colony of Jamestown. It was the first elected assembly in colonial America, though it was quite exclusive, only allowing landowners to vote (usually the rich that paid for their passage and received land because of the headright system). In addition, its (non-elected) governor could nullify anything the assembly tried to pass. Nevertheless, it established precedent for future English American colonies to have representative assemblies govern.


Title: First Africans in America
Description: 19 Africans from modern-day Angola were imported to Jamestown as indentured servants. These were the first Africans of many to be shipped to the Americas.


Title: Colonial population is 2302
Description: All colonists resided in Virginia and the newly founded Plymouth Plantation, as these were the only colonies that existed at the time.


Title: Puritan migration to New England
Description: 


Title: <b>Colony of Plymouth founded</b>
Description: The colony of Plymouth (shown in green) was founded by William Bradford and other Pilgrims.


Title: <b>Mayflower Compact</b>
Description: The Mayflower Compact was written and signed. It was an agreement between the men on board the Mayflower to follow "just and equal laws" passed by elected representatives. This became the first written frame of government in America.


Title: First Thanksgiving
Description: 


Title: Indian Massacre of 1622
Description: An attack by the Powhatan Confederacy on the Virginia colonists that started the Second Anglo-Powhatan War. The Powhatan felt that the colonists were a danger to their way of life, as the English had made numerous attempts to encroach upon Native American land and convert them to Christianity. Powhatan warriors led by Opechancanough shared fruit and meat with the colonists to hide their intentions, then launched a sudden surprise attack, sparing no one they could find. The colonists would later suffer from starvation due to a harsh winter, which killed an additional 400.

Deaths:
347 English settlers


Title: Second Anglo-Powhatan War
Description: 


Title: Royal patent for the Province of Maine granted
Description: 


Title: Settlement at Cape Ann established by the Dorchester Company
Description: 


Title: Wessagusset Affair
Description: 


Title: Pamunkey Peace Talks
Description: 


Title: Mohawk-Mahican War
Description: 


Title: New Netherland chartered as a royal colony
Description: 


Title: Virginia chartered as a royal colony
Description: As it had failed in its goal of collecting gold, King James I of England revoked the Virginia Company's charter and declared the colony under the dominion of the Crown, making it the first royal English colony.


Title: New Amsterdam becomes the capital of New Netherland
Description: 


Title: Accession of King Charles I of England
Description: 


Title: Reign of King Charles I
Description: 


Title: Kalinago Genocide
Description: 


Title: Salem, Massachusetts founded
Description: 


Title: Peter Minuit purchases the island of Manhattan
Description: 


Title: Petition of Right
Description: 


Title: Beaver Wars
Description: 


Title: Colony of New Hampshire established
Description: 


Title: Kiliaen van Rensselaer implements the patroon system
Description: 


Title: Lord Baltimore abandons Avalon
Description: 


Title: Massachusetts Bay Colony chartered
Description: 


Title: Charter of Freedoms and Exemptions
Description: 


Title: Cambridge Agreement
Description: 


Title: Province of Carolina chartered
Description: 


Title: Colonial population is 4646
Description: 


Title: Manor of Rensselaerswyck
Description: 


Title: John Winthrop's "City Upon a Hill" speech
Description: A sermon delivered by Puritan John Winthrop in Southampton in which America is pictured as to be the gold standard for all other civilizations to follow.

Full Text
https://bit.ly/2suE1Ux


Title: Winthrop Fleet leaves for Massachusetts
Description: 


Title: Boston, Massachusetts founded and made the colonial capital
Description: 


Title: First meeting of the Massachusetts General Court
Description: 


Title: Province of Maryland founded
Description: The second Chesapeake colony, Maryland, was established. It was proprietary, meaning that it was granted to a single individual, in this case Cecilius Calvert. Calvert had the power to control trade and initiate legislation in the colony. The charter stressed that "all privileges, franchises, and liberties" be extended to every Englishman in Maryland, Calvert desired a feudal domain in which everyone paid him dues and could not interfere in legislation. He desired Maryland to be a safe haven for Catholics like himself, but Protestants were always the dominant religion there.


Title: Tax protest at Watertown, Massachusetts
Description: 


Title: Transatlantic slave trade begins
Description: Licenses to transport African slaves begins the transAtlantic slave trade.


Title: First settlers arrive in Maryland
Description: 


Title: Massachusetts General Court reformed
Description: The General Court of Massachusetts was the body that governed the colony. It was a group of people elected by freemen (who had to belong to the church and own land), which was divided into a bicameral legislature in 1636. One element that made it unique is that the freemen of Massachusetts could elect their governor, rather than one being royally appointed like in Virginia.


Title: Shires of Virginia established
Description: 


Title: First meeting of the Maryland General Assembly
Description: 


Title: Saybrook Colony founded
Description: The colony of Saybrook (shown in green), named after Lords Saye and Brooke, MPs who controlled the land's grants, was founded by soon-to-be Saybrook Governor John Winthrop the Younger in order to dissuade the Dutch from claiming the same land. Its residents were strong supporters of Oliver Cromwell, and it was even believed that he would leave England to live there. However, he never did, and the colony suffered hardships because of the Pequot War. In 1644, the colony was merged into Connecticut.


Title: Connecticut Colony founded
Description: 100 people led by Thomas Hooker and Massachusetts Bay Governor John Haynes gathered in Hartford (shown in maroon), the capital of the new Connecticut colony. Hooker was discontented that voting in Massachusetts required individuals to be freemen - that is, members of the church. It was later merged with Saybrook and New Haven.


Title: Colony of Providence Plantations founded
Description: 


Title: Pequot War
Description: A war between Massachusetts colonists and the Pequot tribe. Exacerbated by escalating tensions between the two peoples, the war started with the murder of trader John Oldham by Narragansett-allied Indians, who sought refuge with the Pequot. In response, the English burned down a Pequot village, while the Pequot's rival tribes sided with the colonists. After several raids on Pequot settlements were carried out by the colonists and their allies, the Pequot and Wongunk attacked the Connecticut town of Wethersfield on April 23, killing 9 colonists. The war climaxed with the Mystic Massacre, where colonists commanded by John Mason and John Underhill burned down a fortified Pequot settlement, killing nearly all Pequot living inside it. Pequot leader Sassacus fled the area with 400 warriors, pursued by Mason (followed by 200 men) to Fairfield, CT. All but 80 warriors (including Sassacus) were captured. Sassacus went to the Mohawk for help, but was murdered. The war ended with the signing of the Treaty of Hartford. This war essentially destroyed the Pequot tribe.


Title: Roger Williams banished from Massachusetts
Description: Roger Williams was a Puritan minister who arrived in Massachusetts in 1631. He claimed that "soul liberty" demanded that people could follow their consciences, free of restriction. He believed that anyone ought to practice any religion they chose, with no government interference, meaning the separation of church from state. He reasoned that faith was not genuine if it was involuntary, which it certainly was if the government forced it upon its citizens. He also believed that Massachusetts congregations end their association with the Church of England.

This rocked the worldview of powerful Puritans in Massachusetts, such as John Winthrop. He, like most Puritans, thought that religion ought not to be questioned lest society collapse. As such, Williams and his followers were banished from Massachusetts. The heretics moved south and established the colony of Rhode Island.


Title: Harvard College founded
Description: 


Title: Enlightenment
Description: 


Title: Kent Island Rebellion
Description: 


Title: Wethersfield Attack
Description: 


Title: Mystic Massacre
Description: The largest attack in the Pequot War, in which the Pequot Fort by the Mystic River was burned down by Connecticut colonists commanded by Captain John Mason. Both sides had several hundred men on their side, with even the Connecticut colonists' forces primarily consisting of Native Americans. After a failed attempt to invade the fort, Mason ordered his men to set fire to it. The few exits made escape difficult, and anyone who attempted to climb over the wall was shot. Around 500 Pequot died from the attack.


Title: Anne Hutchinson trial
Description: Anne Hutchinson was a woman described as bold-spirited who had unconventional ideas of religion in the dominantly Puritan Massachusetts Bay. Hutchinson believed that Puritan ministers' methods of determining the status of one's salvation or damnation was based on their attendance of church, which was not valid. She held radical beliefs, like that she was a prophetess that God spoke to directly, and that God would destroy both Boston and England. She began holding meetings in her house of several dozen people, usually women, to discuss sermons. Leading Puritans like John Winthrop deemed her to be a threat to society and placed her on trial for Antinomianism (the belief in one's own judgment over that of the church) and sedition (expressing opinions dangerous to authority and the social order). They were also upset that she was not behaving like the typical woman for the time, being outspoken and rebellious instead of quiet and submissive. Though Hutchinson defiantly debated the interpretation of certain Bible passages during her trial, the Puritans reMained unconvinced and exiled her and her followers from Massachusetts. They moved to Westchester in modern-day New York, but were killed soon after in a war with Native Americans. The trial demonstrated how individual interpretation of the Bible often led to criticism of the church, which prominent Puritans feared.


Title: <i>Oath of a Freeman</i>
Description: Oath of A Freeman was a pledge printed by Puritans that one had to take in order to live in Massachusetts Bay. It enumerated the rights and responsibilities of being a citizen of the colony, and requested that people vote based on their own conscience (though they were never tolerant of worldviews conflicting with their own). It was the first paper printed in English America.

Full Text
https://bit.ly/2SGwCSV


Title: First mention of slavery in Maryland law
Description: 


Title: Portsmouth founded
Description: The settlement of Portsmouth was founded by a group of religious dissenters from Massachusetts, including Anne Hutchinson, William Coddington, and Dr. John Clarke. The settlers were originally planning on traveling to New Jersey, but were convinced by Roger Williams (founder of Providence Plantations) to live on modern-day Aquidneck Island instead. They purchased the land from the local Native Americans, who had named the area Pocasset. Since the colonists were exiled from Massachusetts due to their unorthodox religious beliefs, the settlement was based around religious tolerance. In 1639, the settlers renamed the land to Portsmouth after the town in Hampshire, England. It later became part of Rhode Island.


Title: New Sweden founded
Description: The colony of Nya Sverige (New Sweden in English, shown in blue) was founded by Sweden. At this point in history, Sweden was a Great Power, and like the other Great Powers, they wanted to expand their dominion into the New World. Specifically, they wanted to profit from tobacco and fur sales, and so in 1626 they founded the Swedish South Company to build a colony. In 1638, the settlers landed along the Delaware River, an area claimed by New Netherland. The New Dutch protested, but were ignored due to the Swedes' military might. He bargained with the local Native American tribes (mainly the Susquehannocks) to gain the land, though the natives later claimed most of it was stolen. They constructed Fort Christina, which they used as a base to expand farther. However, Sweden would lose their only New World colony in 1655 after they started the Second Northern War with the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, a. This would provide the Dutch with an opening to invade New Sweden and annex it.


Title: New Haven Colony founded
Description: The unofficial colony of New Haven (shown in yellow) was founded by John Davenport and Theophilus Eaton. They were English emigrants who wanted an incredibly strong connection between church and state, the polar opposite of Rhode Island. The colony was riddled with problems, chief among them being the lack of an official charter. Their strong ties to the church also alienated many members of the colony. Davenport, Eaton, and the other founders were merchants who wanted to use to the land to turn a profit, but were unsuccessful in their agricultural ventures there. Starting in 1662, New Haven towns began surrendering their control to Connecticut, and in 1664 the colony was officially subsumed into Connecticut.


Title: English Crown formally recognizes the Virginia Assembly
Description: 


Title: Newport founded
Description: 


Title: Royal patent for the Province of Maine renewed
Description: 


Title: Fundamental Orders of Connecticut
Description: A frame of government for Connecticut colony that was structured similarly to that of Massachusetts Bay, with the key distinction of not requiring citizens to be church members to vote.


Title: Fundamental Agreement of the New Haven Colony
Description: 


Title: Bay Psalm Book printed
Description: The Bay Psalm Book was the first book printed in British North America.


Title: Beaver Wars hit peak intensity
Description: 


Title: Colonial population is 26,634
Description: 


Title: John Punch becomes the first official slave in America
Description: 


Title: Massacre at Staten Island
Description: 


Title: First Beaver War
Description: 


Title: First meeting of representatives in New Netherland
Description: 


Title: New Hampshire absorbed into Massachusetts
Description: 


Title: Massachusetts Body of Liberties
Description: 


Title: Warwick founded
Description: The settlement of Warwick in modern-day Rhode Island was founded by Samuel Gorton. He purchased the land from the Narragansett Sachem (chief) Miantonomi. However, other Sachems disputed the sale, and protested to the Boston government. In response, the next year Massachusetts sent militiamen to Warwick to arrest Gorton and his supporters. Most surrendered, and the settlement was instead incorporated into one colony, along with Newport, Portsmouth, and Providence Plantations.


Title: English Civil War
Description: A conflict between English Royalists and Parliamentarians over the structure of the English government. Specifically, they were at odds over the amount of power allotted to Parliament and the Crown, as well as how much the Church of England should follow or distance itself from the doctrines of Catholicism. The House of Commons (the popularly elected house of Parliament, similar to the US House of Representatives) believed King Charles I to be tyrannical, with acts such as passing taxes without Parliament's consent, imprisoning political rivals, and the gradual religious 'decline' back to Catholicism. This led to the monarchist Royalists and their opposition, the Parliamentarians, to fight a civil war.

New Englanders were mostly Parliamentarians, especially those of Saybrook, while many Royalists could be found in Virginia. Some even came back to England to help fight for their side. In 1649, Parliament captured King Charles I and executed him. The monarchy was declared abolished, to be replaced by 
a Commonwealth and Free State" governed by the people, led by Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell. The monarchy was restored in 1660 with the coronation of Charles II, but with noticeably less power.

The English were struck with a desire for freedoms. It gave rise to the Levellers, the first ever democratic political movement. They proposed a written constitution, entitled the Agreement of the People. It would have abolished the monarchy. the House of Lords (the royally appointed house of Parliament, somewhat similar to the pre-17th Amendment US Senate), and expanded suffrage, overall supporting class equality. An even more radical group, the Diggers, desired essentially a Marxist society, in which there was no government, education was open to all, and land was shared equally among the people.

Groups like these gave rise to the popular notion that Englishmen were born entitled to certain rights and privileges. Writer Henry Care in 1680 described the English government as a "qualified monarchy," in which everyone and their property was protected by law, while the nobility enjoyed further liberty, making it, in Care's opinion, the best form of government at the time. This helped England see itself as an empire of liberty, much like the US later. These ideas would be taken to the New World by English emigrants.


Title: New England Confederation established
Description: 


Title: Roger Williams obtains charter for Rhode Island
Description: 


Title: Kieft's War
Description: A conflict between the settlers of New Netherland (modern-day New York) and several Native American tribes, chiefly the Weckquaesgeeks. In the early 1640s, the New Dutch enjoyed a comparatively peaceful coexistence with the Native American tribes around them. However, in 1638 the Dutch West India Company that managed the colony appointed Willem Kieft as Director-General of New Netherland.

Kieft was openly hostile towards the Natives, and seeked a punitive expedition for the revenge killing of an elderly resident of his colony by a Native American. He created the Council of Twelve Men, a popularly elected group of advisers to assist him in the expedition. However, they instead urged him not to carry out the attack at all, and suggested the Council be used for political purposes. These thoughts echoed those of most New Dutch, as they did not want war with the Native Americans they lived by. The tribes were also more numerous and controlled the fur trade the Dutch West India Company relied on to turn a profit.

Kieft ignored their advice, dissolved the Council, and launched an attack on the Weckquaesgeeks, with over 100 soldiers killing as many Native Americans. In response, several tribes formed an alliance, the Wappinger Confederacy, and attacked with 1500 warriors in the autumn, killing many colonists and destroying much farmland and buildings. Kieft attacked again in December 1643, killing 500 Weckquaesgeeks. The New Dutch began to rebel against Kieft, with many colonists straight-out left the colony. Not perturbed, Kieft hired Captain John Underhill to attack the Native alliance. His forces killed over 1000 Natives, with most of the casualties being from the Pound Ridge Massacre in March 1644, the climax of the war. Underhill and 130 men burned a Wappinger village to the ground, killing 500-700.

Despite this great loss, the Wappinger (which grew to 69 tribes strong by the end of the war) continued to harass and raid New Netherlands. In August 1645, the two sides signed a truce, ending the war. In 1647, Kieft was recalled by the Dutch West India Company for his transgressions, but died in a shipwreck on his way back to Europe. Because of the colonists' mass abandonment of New Netherland, the growth of the colony slowed dramatically. The death toll of the war was also quite high, proportional to the populations at the time (the colonial capital of New Amsterdam only had about 800 residents).


Title: Pavonia Massacre
Description: 


Title: Hutchinson Massacre
Description: 


Title: Massapequa Massacre
Description: 


Title: Plundering Time
Description: 


Title: Pound Ridge Massacre
Description: 


Title: Saybrook absorbed into Connecticut
Description: 


Title: Colony of Providence Plantations established
Description: 


Title: Third Anglo-Powhatan War
Description: A third conflict between the Powhatan Confederacy and the colonists of Virginia. Afraid of the increased expansion of English land, Powhatan forces led by Opechancanough launched a desperate attack against the colonists, killing roughly 500. The colonists retaliated, attacking the Powhatan and their allies in July 1644, followed by an attack on the Powhatan stronghold. Opechancanough was captured and killed, and the Powhatan Confederacy along with him. The war ended with the Treaty of 1846, which made the Native American tribes under the Powhatan Confederacy subjects of the English Crown, as well as marking a boundary between the Virginia colony and the Native American settlements (marked by the red line in the image).


Title: Indian Massacre of 1644
Description: 


Title: Peter Stuyvesant becomes governor of New Netherland
Description: 


Title: Opechancanough killed
Description: 


Title: Cambridge Platform
Description: 


Title: John Winthrop dies
Description: 


Title: King Charles I executed
Description: 


Title: Maryland Toleration Act
Description: Officially known as An Act Concerning Religion, it was a law passed in Maryland that decreed freedom for Trinitarian Christians (those who believed that God was composed of three individuals - the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit) to practice their religion. However, those who denied the existence of the Trinity or the divinity of Jesus Christ could be executed or have their land confiscated. It outlawed the USe of the word "heretic" and similar insults to describe them, making it one of the earliest laws restricting hate speech. It was repealed in 1654.


Title: Anne Bradstreet's <i>The Tenth Muse Lately Sprung up in America</i>
Description: 


Title: Colonial population is 50,368
Description: 


Title: Virginia recognizes the authority of Parliament
Description: 


Title: Navigation Act 1651
Description: A law that granted the Commonwealth the power to regulate England's trade internationally and with its colonies. It also banned non-English ships from transporting goods from Asia, Africa, or the Americas to England or its colonies. Ships that counted as English were those with an English master, owner, the majority of its crew. The law purposefully targeted the Dutch, who dominated Europe's international trade. The law was later repealed in 1660 when the English monarchy was restored and replaced with new Navigation Acts.


Title: Rhode Island bans slavery
Description: 


Title: Hull Mint founded
Description: 


Title: First settlements in Carolina founded
Description: The Albemale Settlements were founded by emigrants from Virginia.


Title: Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell
Description: 


Title: John Casor becomes the first legal non-criminal slave
Description: 


Title: Battle of the Severn
Description: A conflict between Maryland colonists on the Severn River near modern-day Annapolis. After the English Civil War, Parliament appointed two Commissioners to force Virginia to obey Parliament. One was Richard Bennett, who became Virginia's governor, and the other was William Claiborne, who had previously tried to seize the island during the war. They forced Governor William Stone to resign, allowing them to take control of the colony. The general assembly passed dozens of laws under their watch, including the prohibition of Catholics who had taken up arms against Parliament (which included most of them), a repeal of the Toleration Act of 1649, and the prohibition of practicing Catholicism. On January 31, 1655, a ship arrived captained by Roger Heamans. Another then showed up with a letter from Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell addressing William Stone as governor. Stone used this to assert the validity of his former position. The Commissioners appointed William Fuller to head the attack for the coming conflict. Heamans began firing upon boats on the Severn on March 24, and the next day the Puritan forces led by Fuller and the Catholic and moderate Protestant forces led by Roger Heamans engaged each other on the river. After about 30 minutes of fighting, Fuller emerged victorious, even wounding Stone. The assembly reMained in power until 1658, when Lord Baltimore's proprietorship was restored.

Casualties:
17 Stone-loyal men killed in battle
4 Stone-loyal men executed
32 Stone-loyal men wounded
2 Puritans killed


Title: Peach Tree War
Description: 


Title: New Sweden annexed by New Netherland
Description: The colony of New Sweden was built in an area already claimed by the Dutch West India Company, However, due to Sweden's superior military, they were able to keep the settlement well-defended from the weaker Dutch. This changed in 1655, when Sweden and the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth fought each other in the Second Northern War. Sweden was no longer able to keep its New World colony protected, allowing the Dutch to invade and capture it. New Sweden was formally annexed on September 15. However, the New Dutch allowed the New Swedes a degree of autonomy. allowing them to keep their own militia, religion, court, and land. This autonomy would be removed in 1664, when New Netherland was annexed by England.


Title: First Quakers arrive in New England
Description: 


Title: Jews allowed to become burghers of New Amsterdam
Description: 


Title: Maine absorbed into Massachusetts
Description: 


Title: Lord Protector Richard Cromwell
Description: 


Title: Oliver Cromwell dies
Description: 


Title: First Esopus War
Description: A brief conflict between New Netherland and the Esopus tribe. It began with a drunken Esopus man firing off a musket in celebration of completing some work. A group of New Dutch became upset and suspected that they were under attack. On September 20, a mob attacked some Esopus workers. The next day, hundreds of warriors arrived and began destroying crops and buildings and killing livestock. The New Dutch were unable to directly fight the Esopus, so they stuck to burning their enemy's crops. The war ended with the Esopus requesting peace and food on July 15, 1660. However, this did not resolve the tensions between the two groups, and another war would break out three years later.


Title: Colonial population is 75,058
Description: 


Title: Mary Dyer executed
Description: 


Title: William Berkeley restored as governor of Virginia
Description: 


Title: Navigation Act 1660
Description: Part of the Navigation Acts, it was a law passed that mostly reused the ideas from the 1651 act, but with even stricter measures in place. It required ship crews to be at least 75% English, and for a bond to be purchased as collateral for compliance with the law. It required warships to seize foreign ships and take them to the Court of Admiralty (a court with jurisdiction over maritime laws). It enumerated seven goods that could only be shipped between England and its colonies: sugar, tobacco, cotton wool, indigo, ginger, fustic, and other dyeing woods. It barred foreign merchants from doing business in English colonies.

It was coupled with several other acts passed at the same time, including:

Customs Act 1660: Passed with the first Navigation Act. It specified how customs duties would be collected, as well as clarifying that for the purposes of the Navigation Acts, an Englishman was counted only as a subject of England, Ireland, or its plantations.

Exportation Act 1660: Passed with the first Navigation Act. Banned the export of wool and wool processing materials. This was made so in order to encourage domestic wool production,

Tobacco Planting and Sowing Act 1660: Passed with the first Navigation Act. Banned growing tobacco in England or Ireland in order to limit competition with the colonies.


Title: Fendall's Rebellion
Description: 


Title: <b>Restoration of the English monarchy</b>
Description: The monarchy was restored to the kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The monarch over all three was King Charles II, who arrived in London from exile on May 29.


Title: Reign of King Charles II
Description: 


Title: Connecticut Colony chartered as a royal colony
Description: The royal charter also placed New Haven under the control of Connecticut. It was officially transferred in 1664, and the New Haven General Court submitted to Connecticut on January 5, 1665.


Title: Half-Way Covenant of 1662
Description: A religious law established to amend the problem of declining church membership in Massachusetts. While most who came to the colony during the Great Migration were devout Puritans, their children were less enthusiastic, and their children even less so. By 1659, less than half of Boston had full church membership. Puritan leaders had to decide whether or not to uphold their strict qualifications for membership. Doing so would diminish the church's presence, while relaxing their standards would promote more membership but reduce religious purity. The Half-Way Covenant of 1662 was implemented as a compromise. It allowed for the baptism of grandchildren of Great Migration immigrants, thus basing church members to be more based on ancestry rather than conversion. Despite this, church membership continued its decline.


Title: Virginia law declares the children of enslaved mothers are also slaves
Description: 


Title: Royal commission investigates conditions in New England
Description: 


Title: Slave rebellion in Gloucester County, Virginia
Description: 


Title: Province of Carolina chartered as a royal colony
Description: The colony of Carolina was chartered to eight English noblemen, the Lords Proprietors. It was created in order to serve as an obstacle to northern Spanish expansion. It began as part of the Caribbean colony of Barbados, the richest plantation economy in the area. Due to the small size of the island, people began to move from there to Carolina.


Title: Second Esopus War
Description: A conflict between the New Dutch and the Esopus tribe. The New Dutch were tricked into letting down their defense while trying to negotiate peace between the two peoples. Warriors snuck into New Amsterdam and took control over most of it. The people of New Netherland soon found out that the Esopus had destroyed a neighboring city, and drove the attackers out of New Amsterdam. The New Dutch began receiving reinforcements and allying with other tribes, and by July had enough men to attack the Esopus. However, they soon found that they were still outnumbered, and much like in the first war they stuck to burning the tribe's crops to starve them. The war ended with a battle in early September, when the New Dutch attacked and killed Esopus Chief Papequanaehen, followed by a pillaging of a nearby Esopus fort. The conflict between the two peoples ended, though tensions still remained. The New Dutch learned to remain distrustful of Native Americans, even the Mohawks that had assisted them in the war.


Title: Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations chartered as a royal colony
Description: The Rhode Island Royal charter was approved by King Charles II of England. It united the four settlements of Newport, Providence Plantations, Portsmouth, and Warwick.


Title: Navigation Act 1663
Description: Part of the Navigation Acts, it was a law passed declaring that all European goods bound for the colonies had to pass through England first, in order to make the country the staple for those products. Because of this detour, shipping times and costs increased as a result.


Title: New Haven absorbed into Connecticut
Description: 


Title: <b>New Netherland captured and annexed by England</b>
Description: Despite frequent pleas from the New Dutch to be supplied with defenses to protect themselves from the ever-increasing colonial power of the English, the Dutch West India Company reMained ambivalent towards the future of its colony. In order to remove their maritime rival from North America, King Charles II of England ordered the annexation of New Netherland in March 1664. England claimed that John Cabot, an Italian explorer working for the English, had discovered the land first, giving their country the right to it. On August 27, four English ships arrived at the Dutch colony, and were met with no resistance. King Charles II gifted the colony to his brother, the duke of York, granting him ultimate authority over the land. The colony was subsequently renamed to New York. The duke of York in turn gifted part of New York to Sir George Carteret in order to repay a debt, who named his new land New Jersey after his ancestral home.


Title: Duke's Laws
Description: 


Title: Second Anglo-Dutch War
Description: 


Title: Treaty of Breda
Description: 


Title: Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina
Description: Carolina's constitutions were adopted by the Lords Proprietors, the group of English nobles in charge of the colony. It seeked to establish a feudal society with hereditary nobility (meaning that children of nobles gained the same status), as well as serfs and slaves. However, the colony also adopted an elected assembly and promised religious toleration of Protestants, so as to not discourage immigration. They also had a large headright system, in which 150 acres would be granted to each arriving family, and 100 acres to male indentured servants who had completed their contract. However, what actually arose was the dominance of slavery. Slave owners were promised ultimate authority over their slaves, and invited people to bring slaves with them when they arrived in the colony, such as from Barbados. Thanks to the headright system, these owners would quickly amass large amounts of land.


Title: John Lederer explores the Appalachian Mountains
Description: 


Title: René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle explores the Ohio River Valley and the Mississippi River Valley
Description: 


Title: Charleston, Carolina founded
Description: 


Title: Colonial population is 111,935
Description: 


Title: First settlers arrive in Carolina
Description: 


Title: Tobacco Planting and Plantation Trade Act
Description: Also known as the Navigation Act 1670, it declared that any ships without a bond or that unload any 'enumerated good' specified in the Navigation Act 1660 in any non-English port would be confiscated along with their cargo. Ireland's ability to obtain bonds necessary to ship products overseas were repealed. Governors of American plantations had to send an annual report of the loading of any commodities and all bonds taken to London.


Title: Out of the 40,000 inhabitants of Virginia, 2000 are slaves and 6000 are indentured servants
Description: 


Title: Batts-Fallam expedition
Description: 


Title: Connecticut Blue Laws
Description: 


Title: Third Anglo-Dutch War
Description: 


Title: Royal African Company established
Description: 


Title: Navigation Act 1673
Description: 


Title: Jacques Marquette and Louis Joliet explore the Mississippi River
Description: 


Title: Dutch capture of New York
Description: 


Title: New Jersey partitioned
Description: During the Third-Anglo Dutch War, the colonies of New York and New Jersey were captured by the Dutch (as they were former constituents of New Netherland). However, when the Dutch Republic lost the war, they agreed to give the captured North American colonies back to England. New Jersey was then partitioned into two distinct colonies, East and West Jersey. They were divided by the Keith Line (shown in red) and the Coxe-Barclay Line (shown in orange). The two would later be reunified in 1702.


Title: Treaty of Westminster
Description: 


Title: Lords of Trade
Description: A group of people selected by Parliament that oversaw colonial affairs. They were dissolved in 1696 and replaced by the Board of Trade.


Title: Northfield, Massachusetts abandoned
Description: 


Title: Susquehannock War
Description: 


Title: England regains control of New York
Description: 


Title: King Philip's War
Description: A war between the English colonists and the Wampanoag tribe, the latter led by Metacom (aka Philip). Tensions between the two groups raised in 1671 when Metacom refused the terms to a peace deal, and peaked in 1675 when three Wampanoags were charged with murder and subsequently hanged by the English. The Wampanoags allied themselves with the Nipmucks, Podunks, Narragansetts, and Nashaway, while the colonists allied with the Mohegans and Pequots.

In June 1675, Metacom's allies attacked the Swansea settlement in Plymouth, followed by several more raids in Massachusetts. The New England Confederation (Massachusetts Bay, Plymouth, New Haven and Connecticut) declared war on September 9, followed shortly by the Battle of Bloody Brook, where Metacom's allies ambushed colonists, killing 57. The Confederation then launched an attack on a fort full of Narragansetts in the middle of a frozen swamp, known as the Great Swamp Fight. A force of about 1000 militiamen and Native American allies killed nearly 600 Narragansetts and burned the fort, losing 70 themselves. Metacom attempted to enlist the Mohawk tribe, but instead found himself attacked by the tribe and driven away.

Metacom's forces continued to raid many a New England settlement in the 1675-1676 winter, such as in Lancaster, MA, where a force of 1500 warriors attacked the village and killed over 30, as well as kidnapping the governor's wife, Mary Rowlandson. Metacom continued to Plymouth Plantation, killing militiamen and burning settlements as they went. In April 1676, Metacom attacked Sudbury, MA and killed over 30. Led by MA militia Captain William Turner, the colonists retaliated by killing several hundred Native Americans at Turner's Falls, followed by Hadley and Marlborough. On August 12, 1676, Metacom was killed by forces led by Captains Benjamin Church and Josiah Standish in Rhode Island. His head was then displayed on a pike for many decades. On August 28, Church captured Pocasset Chief Anawan, essentially ending the war in southern New England. In Maine, however, fighting continued until 1678, where the English saw much less success due to their low populations there and from the French backing the Wabanaki tribes there.

The war was the deadliest in English colonial history, both for the colonists and Native Americans. About 1000 Native Americans were sold into slavery as punishment. Fighting continued around Maine until the end of Dummer's War.

Casualties: 
1000 settlers
3000 Native Americans
By percentages, the bloodiest war in American history (5% of colonists and 40% of Native Americans died).


Title: Raid on Swansea
Description: 


Title: Susquehannock Massacre
Description: 


Title: Great Swamp Massacre
Description: 


Title: <b>Bacon's Rebellion</b>
Description: An uprising of farmers led by Nathaniel Bacon. It started after scandals arose concerning Virginian Governor William Berkeley. Since the 1640s, he had been running the colony with the help of wealthy tobacco planters, as ell as granting excessive rewards to his supporters. Falling tobacco prices due to excessive supply, compounded by heavy taxes on the crop and little viable land available for those not in Berkeley's circle, left many former indentured servants (a sizable demographic of the colony) quite poor. In 1670, suffrage was revoked for non-landowners. He also refused to allow the colony to expand into Native American territory.

In 1676, there was a confrontation between Native Americans and Virginians. The latter demanded retribution against the tribe, but Berkeley refused. In response, Bacon organized an uprising. He and his 500 men marched on a nearby Native American settlement and killed basically everyone there. Bacon died of dysentery on October 26, and the rebellion was defeated soon after. 23 of his supporters were hanged as punishment. It helped lead to the expansion of slavery because it caused Southern plantation owners to seek out newer forms of labor other than indentured servitude that could be more easily controlled.


Title: William Penn purchases West Jersey
Description: 


Title: Nine Men's Misery
Description: 


Title: Massacre at Occoneechee Island
Description: 


Title: Turner Falls Massacre
Description: 


Title: Massacre in Rhode Island
Description: 


Title: Battle of Mount Hope
Description: 


Title: Burning of Jamestown
Description: After capturing the city during Bacon's Rebellion, Nathaniel Bacon realized his troops could not hold it or allow the governor to retake it, so he and his troops burned the city to the ground.


Title: Culpeper's Rebellion
Description: A revolt led by John Culpeper in North Carolina over taxes. North Carolinians were harmed by the Navigation Acts, which heavily taxed tobacco, one of the colony's main products. These dues were compounded by the lack of good crops for several years brought on by hurricanes and droughts. The heads of Carolina, the Lords Proprietors, refused to discontinue the taxes, and appointed two men loyal to them to high positions. Thomas Eastchurch became the colony's new governor, while Thomas Miller received the job of customs collector. Eastchurch, in England at the time, was delayed in arriving at Carolina, so Miller appointed himself governor in the meantime. He interfered in local elections and imprisoned his political opponents, including George Durant.

Dissatisfied with the way Miller and the Proprietors were running the colony, a group of forty men decided to depose the new governor. They were led by Durant, John Valentine (the customs collector before Miller), and John Culpeper. They imprisoned Miller, but the interim governor managed to escape to England. He and Culpeper argued their sides before the Proprietors and Parliament. Culpeper was acquitted of charges of rebellion.

After the rebellion, the Lords Proprietors made stronger attempts to establish a real government in Carolina. Durant acted as the unofficial governor, restoring peace and order to the province. When the official governor, Seth Sothel, arrived in 1683, he was found to be corrupt and was deposed. Philip Ludwell became the new governor in 1691, who was ordered by the Proprietors to ignore the Fundamental Constitutions in favor of the original charter. Carolina became stable and continued growing.


Title: Province of Maine absorbed into Massachusetts Bay Colony
Description: 


Title: Covenant Chain
Description: An alliance was forged between the English colony of New York led by Governor Sir Edmund Andros and the Iroquois Confederacy. The Native Americans helped New Yorkers to remove the presence of opposing tribes around the area, as well as in attacks against the French and their Native American allies (the Wabanaki). In return, Andros recognized Iroquois authority over a large area of land expanding to the Ohio River.


Title: Henri de Tonti explores the upper Great Lakes and the Illinois and Mississippi Rivers
Description: 


Title: <i>The Pilgrim's Progress</i>
Description: 


Title: Treaty of Casco Bay
Description: 


Title: Province of New Hampshire chartered as a royal colony
Description: New Hampshire received an official charter from King Charles II of England, breaking it free from Massachusetts, which had previously governed the territory. Its first president was John Cutt, who assumed office in 1680.


Title: War between South Carolina and the Westo
Description: 


Title: Exclusion Crisis
Description: 


Title: Charleston, Carolina relocated
Description: 


Title: Colonial population is 151,507
Description: 


Title: Pueblo Revolt
Description: A revolt in which Native Americans led by Popé successfully drove Spanish settlers out of Santa Fe, then proceeded to destroy their religious symbols. This was the only time European settlers were forcefully and totally driven out of a colony. 12 years later, the Spanish retook New Mexico with little effort.

Casualties:
400 Spanish
600+ Native Americans


Title: Province of Pennsylvania founded
Description: The colony of Pennsylvania was chartered by King Charles II of England to William Penn (after whom the colony was named). The colony was organized to be another religious safe haven. Penn was a Quaker, another religious group persecuted in England. Similarly to Rhode Island, Pennsylvania was quite radical, desiring equality for blacks, women, and Native Americans. Penn disliked slavery, and offered refuge to Native American tribes driven out of their homeland through war. Penn also made sure to purchase land claimed by Native Americans, sometimes even twice when multiple tribes claimed it. Since Quakers were pacifists, it was important that Penn sustain good relations with his Native American neighbors. The colonial government was an appointed legislative council and an elected assembly, with most men being able to vote. Penn sold land at low prices, never turning much of a profit.


Title: Maryland-Pennsylvania-Delaware border dispute
Description: There had been a dispute between the borders of the colonies of Maryland and Pennsylvania ever since the latter's charter had been issued. Maryland's northern border was defined in its 1632 charter as the 40th parallel. Pennsylvania's charter, written in 1682, described its colony's southern border similarly: "a Circle drawne at twelve miles distance from New Castle Northward and Westward unto the beginning of the fortieth degree of Northern Latitude, and then by a streight Line Westward to the Limitt of Longitude above-mentioned." In plain English, the border was to be the 40th parallel, except when that overlapped with the area around New Castle, which the border was to go around. This Twelve Mile Circle around New Castle, a town in modern-day Delaware, belonged to James, the Duke of York. King Charles II, who wrote the charter, apparently thought that New Castle laid near the 40th parallel, and was trying to make sure Pennsylvania's land did not overlap with that of the Duke of York, who was his brother. There would be no other reason to specify this Twelve Mile Circle. However, his map must have been inaccurate, because New Castle in fact lies 25 miles south of the 40th parallel. This meant that even if the Twelve Mile Circle ran all the way north, it could never intercept the 40th parallel, so the two segments of Pennsylvania's southern border would not line up, which became a primary cause of the dispute.

The first problem arose on September 16, 1681, when William Penn, proprietor of Pennsylvania, sent letters to the residents of Baltimore and Cecil Counties explaining that they would not have to pay taxes to Maryland, under the (incorrect) impression that these areas were within his territory. Therefore, when Cecil Calvert, 3rd Lord of Baltimore and proprietor of Maryland, sent tax collectors to the region, they were met with strong resistance by those who thought they didn't have to pay. Calvert, desperate to resolve the issue, called for a meeting with William Markham, the lieutenant governor of Pennsylvania. After postponing several times, Markham met with Calvert in Upland, just north of New Castle, in September. Both parties brought surveyors, who eventually agreed that the latitude of the site was 39 degrees, 47 minutes, and 5 seconds. They arranged to meet at New Castle the following day to find the 40th parallel, but Markham never showed. He sent a letter to Calvert explaining that he would not accept the 40th parallel as a boundary because it laid more than 12 miles north of New Castle, which would violate the Pennsylvanian charter. It would seem this resolve was not going to come to the speedy end Calvert wanted.

Meanwhile, Penn discovered that his colony would have no access to the Atlantic Ocean. However, the Twelve Mile Circle did have access, as New Castle itself laid on the Delaware River, an easy entrance to the ocean. Luckily for Penn, he was friends with the Duke of York, so he was able to convince him to permanently lease the Twelve Mile Circle to him, which was formalized on August 21, 1682. Three days later, the Duke granted Penn all his land south of the circle, which consisted of the Deale and St. Jones counties (renamed to Sussex and Kent, respectively, on December 23). These counties, along with New Castle County (the Twelve Mile Circle), were formally annexed into Pennsylvania on December 4, and became known as the Lower Counties of Pennsylvania. Calvert objected to this; the Maryland charter entitled him to the entire Chesapeake Peninsula, the land between the Chesapeake and Delaware Bays. Yet Penn had just purchased the Lower Counties, which surely laid on the peninsula, though their borders were as unsurveyed as the northern border. Now the dispute involved the 40th parallel, the Twelve Mile Circle, and the Chesapeake Peninsula.

Another meeting was called, this time with Penn himself. He and Calvert met at Annapolis on December 12 to discuss this triple threat of land disputes. First, the issue of the Twelve Mile Circle. The Pennsylvania charter defined the circle as "drawne at twelve miles distance from New Castle," indicating an arc with a radius of twelve miles, as Penn maintained was the case. But Calvert claimed that the "twelve miles distance" actually referred to circumference, producing a noticeably smaller arc. As for the Chesapeake Peninsula, Calvert insisted that his claim to the area was the more legitimate, as St. Mary's City, which was founded by the first Maryland settlers, had been on the western shore ever since 1634. Penn said that it only established legitimacy for the western half, and since Calvert never built any towns to the east, that area was definitively in the Lower Counties. At the very least, the two agreed that the 40th parallel was to constitute most of the northern border between the two colonies. The disagreement here was over how to measure where this parallel was. Calvert suggested using the generally-accepted method of using a sextant, while Penn wanted to use an elaborate and ultimately inaccurate method to measure a line 2 degrees and 55 minutes from Cape Charles. It is believed that Penn insisted on this method because he knew his line would give him an extra 29 miles south of the actual location of the parallel, granting him his much-desired access to the Chesapeake Bay. Even if they had gone through with Penn's idea, a line due north of Cape Charles would run into the bay, an unacceptable boundary. They were ultimately unable to make any headway on any of the borders. They met again at New Castle in May 1683, but again achieved nothing. The only point of note was that Penn offered to follow along with Calvert's sextant plan if he got control of the headwaters of Chesapeake Bay, but the Maryland proprietor declined.

Seeing as their negotiations were going nowhere, they brought the issue to the Commissioners for Trade and Plantations in England. These commissioners were officers of the new king of England, James II. This King James also happened to be the former Duke of York, Penn's old friend. Penn had assured himself an easy victory because of this, but evidently his cordiality with the king was not enough to convince the commissioners of his initial arguments. Penn revised his strategy; now he argued that the Maryland charter only gave Calvert "uncultivated lands" on the Chesapeake Peninsula. The Dutch had already settled on the eastern shore of the Chesapeake Peninsula in the early 17th century, so Calvert was not entitled to that land. This argument found more success with the commissioners, who voted that Maryland indeed was not entitled to the east of the peninsula. On November 7, 1685, King James issued a compromise decree. He advised splitting the peninsula by a line heading south from the 40th parallel and a line heading west from Cape Henlopen, which was located at the entrance of Delaware Bay. The rest of the border was to remain at the 40th parallel, a ruling in Maryland's favor. In 1688, King James issued a new charter to Pennsylvania, formally defining the borders of the Lower Counties in accordance with this decree.

It is at this point that something important should be disclosed: that of surveying. As you can probably tell, colonial charters were not the most specific or accurate when it came to border definitions. In order to establish legitimate ownership of a region, that region was supposed to be surveyed and monuments were supposed to be placed marking the boundary. However, Calvert had continued to neglect having Maryland's northern boundary surveyed, which was part of the reason why this whole dispute was a dispute in the first place. Even in the 1680s, after King James' decree, Calvert still would not have the land surveyed, even though it would have ended the dispute in his favor. The other way to establish legitimacy over a land claim was to settle loyal families in the region, but Calvert did not do this until it was too late, even though his colony had a fifty year head start on Penn's.

The border dispute would rear its head again thirteen years later. On July 20, 1701, the Lower Counties petitioned the Pennsylvania Assembly for a separate legislature and administrative officers. This was a long time coming; New Castle and Philadelphia often conflicted commercially, and the residents of the Lower Counties and Pennsylvanians were ethnically and religiously distinct. Pennsylvanians also disliked how the Lower Counties disrupted the government. Penn wanted to balance the representation of the Upper Counties (Chester, Philadelphia, and Bucks) aka Pennsylvania Proper, with that of the Lower Counties. Therefore, assent from both the Upper and Lower Counties was required before laws could be passed, and the meeting place of the legislature itself was to alternate between Philadelphia and New Castle. Upper County residents, who vastly outnumbered their southern neighbors, resented the Lower Counties having an undue influence on their legislation, so they were more than willing to grant the petition. The Lower Counties, later renamed to Delaware, would be self-governing evermore.

Although Delaware's borders had been officially defined in Pennsylvania's 1688 charter, they had not been surveyed (much like every other border in this saga). Previously, this was not much of an issue, as there were no major settlements in that area anyway. Now that the area had become its own colony, however, there was a more pressing need for definitive boundaries so settlers would know where they could go. To this end, on August 28 Penn commissioned a survey of the border between New Castle and Chester Counties. This boundary was to be an arc of a circle with a twelve-mile radius centered around New Castle and extending from the Delaware River westward 120 degrees, finally defining the Twelve-Mile Circle. The surveyors, Isaac Taylor of Chester County and Thomas Piersons of New Castle County, began on September 24 heading out twelve miles from New Castle (though it was later found that they went 2000 feet too far out). They then measured a series of four circular arcs, each separated by a natural boundary like a creek, which resulted in not quite a circle, but a decent approximation. They finished on October 4. However, it took until 1715 for the Pennsylvania Assembly to approve the survey as the boundary between Chester and New Castle Counties, and 1719 for the Delaware Assembly to do the same. The matter of the Twelve Mile Circle seemed settled for the moment, but the rest of the Maryland-Pennsylvania border had yet to be surveyed.

As Calvert and Penn fought legal battles over the land, settlers in the disputed territory itself began fighting physically. The trouble began in 1722, when the Pennsylvania Assembly began establishing a settlement by the Codorus Creek in modern-day York County, PA after hearing rumors that Maryland was trying to do the same. Relations between the two colonies quickly deteriorated, and both began rushing to settle, even after a 1724 royal proclamation expressly prohibiting this until the dispute was resolved. One such settler was John Wright, an English-born Quaker leader, which of course meant he settled in the name of Pennsylvania. In 1727, he built two dugout canoes and started a business ferrying settlers across the creeks. Pennsylvanian settlement, and subsequently Wright’s ferry service, increased in 1730, including many Dutch families. Not to be outdone, Marylander Thomas Cresap set up a rival ferry business four miles south of Wright’s Ferry near modern-day Washington Boro, PA.

Calvert worried that if he did not act fast, he would lose the disputed territory to settlers before he could settle the matter legally. He granted Cresap title to 500 acres along the mostly already-inhabited west bank, in open defiance of the 1724 proclamation. The Pennsylvania Dutch families along the west bank were not allowed there, either, but they were merely living on the land without title, which was less of an issue than selling land without title. But now that Cresap had "official authority" over the land, he approached the Dutch families, offering to sell it to them as a part of Maryland. Many of these families accepted the deal, as holding title over the land was better than not. They had the best of both worlds; if Maryland won ownership of the land, then they had bought the land legitimately, and if Pennsylvania won, the colony would surely not kick out their own settlers. It worked for Cresap because he was essentially getting settlers trying to claim the land for Pennsylvania to admit they were in Maryland, undermining their rival's legitimacy to the area. He also began collecting quit-rents, a kind of land tax often used in British colonies. Pennsylvanian authorities, now catching wind of this, were of course mad that Maryland was profiting off of Pennsylvanian settlers using land they weren’t allowed to own. They wanted to stop, or at least counter Cresap's schemes, but they also didn't want to break the royal proclamation. They had Wright’s Ferry issue tickets to new settlers that promised to award title when the area was officially opened for settlement. This was still not allowed, but it was less egregious of a violation that Cresap's new land business.

It was only a matter of time before the tension erupted into violence. In late October, Cresap and one of his workmen were attacked by two Pennsylvanians, one of whom swore he would kill the ferryman. Cresap narrowly escaped and was rescued by a friendly Indian. It was later revealed through testimony that the target of the attack was actually Cresap’s workman, who was wanted in Lancaster County, PA. However, Cresap insisted that Pennsylvanian officials had conspired with the attackers and Indian tribes to attack the ferryman for his business. Meanwhile, both Pennsylvanians and Marylanders, including the Chief Justice of Cecil County, and Isaac Taylor, the Pennsylvanian surveyor of the Twelve Mile Circle, had been secretly surveying the disputed region, stirring up more tension.

This conflict had been going on for so long that both Charles Calvert and William Penn had died by this point. Penn's three children had inherited their father's land, and the new proprietor of Maryland was Charles Calvert, 5th Lord Baltimore (not to be confused with the previous Charles Calvert, who was 3rd Lord Baltimore). This new generation would continue the fight over the Twelve Mile Circle, the 40th parallel, and the Chesapeake Peninsula. In 1731, Calvert petitioned the Committee for Trade and Plantations to force the Penns into settling the dispute. The Committee held many meetings discussing the borders. Calvert, like his father, insisted that the border laid at the 40th parallel. The Penns had given up on their father's idea of badly measuring the 40th parallel, instead claiming that the true colonial border laid fifteen miles south of Philadelphia. During the border dispute, it had been discovered that Philadelphia, Pennsylvania’s primary city, actually lay south of the 40th parallel. It had been built in 1682, before the border dispute had really began and had been operating under Pennsylvania’s borders as defined by the colony's charter. If the 40th parallel were to become the border, it would leave Pennsylvania in an awkward situation where its main city, population, and source of revenue and prestige would no longer be in Pennsylvania. It may seem like Penn had brought this upon himself by not waiting until this conflict's resolution before building Philadelphia. However, in those days when an incident like this could not be resolved in a timely manner (and we can see here it certainly hasn't), building towns and settling residents is a good way of establishing legitimacy over a region. Philadelphia therefore strengthened the Penns' claim to the region. Even Calvert conceded this point, primarily pressing his land claims west of the city. He likely expected the Committee to rule the border as the 40th parallel, with some kind of exception for Philadelphia. The Penns wanted to take this implicit concession even further by supposing that this exception for Philadelphia extended all the way west. Plus, this line intersected the Twelve Mile Circle, so this assertion had some legitimacy through the Pennsylvania charter. After much deliberation, the Committee drafted Articles of Agreement, their final decision. The official demarcation line was to run west from Cape Henlopen to the middle of the Chesapeake Peninsula, then north to a point tangent to the Twelve Mile Circle, then around the circle until it was north of the tangent point, then north until it intersected an east-west line 15 miles south of Philadelphia. This decision was a huge gain for Pennsylvania. Maryland was officially ceding its claim to the Lower Counties on the Delaware, although they had not held any legitimate claim to it since 1701 anyway. More importantly, Maryland had suddenly found its 40th parallel claim, which had been validated in 1685, cast aside. Yet both colonies agreed to sign the ruling on May 10, 1732 even though the new line resulted in the loss of 3700 square miles for Maryland. It is unknown why Calvert agreed to such an unfavorable decision, but agree he did.

The agreement also called for a Commission of seven for each party to demarcate the border, either with natural objects or stones. The first meeting was not held until 1734, a full two years after the agreement was signed. The Commissioners were selected, which included both colonial governors. They were meant to settle the center and size of the Twelve Mile Circle. You may recall the matter was supposedly settled in 1701, but only Pennsylvania and Delaware had ratified the survey, not Maryland. Their Commissioners had recycled the 3rd Lord Baltimore's claim that the "twelve miles" referred to the circle's circumference, while the Pennsylvanians maintained that it was the radius, like how it was surveyed in 1701 (each of which “coincidentally” gave their side more land). Also, the center was to be New Castle, but where in New Castle, exactly? Was it to be the physical center, the town square, the church, or some other point of interest? Eventually, they gave up and went home, leaving only a joint statement saying they couldn’t agree on anything.

To make matters worse, Calvert suddenly claimed that the Articles of Agreement he had signed contained geographical inaccuracies, and refused to enact it. He was not wrong; the map the agreement used located Cape Henlopen incorrectly. The false map, which ironically had been presented by Calvert in the first place, placed Cape Henlopen where modern-day Fenwick Island actually is. The error was costing Maryland 800 square miles more than Calvert had signed up for. The Penns pressed the advantage, saying that even if the map was inaccurate, they had all agreed to it, Calvert included. Not to be deterred, in 1735, the 5th Lord Baltimore opened a chancery suit over the issue, a chancery suit being one to be resolved using fairness and equity as a guide instead of common law. This suit would go on for 15 years.

Meanwhile, conflict between the settlers was escalating. Cresap obtained patents for his ferries and began raiding farms, shooting one farmer’s horses and seizing another’s plantation. Several dozen men, led by the Lancaster County sheriff, approached Cresap’s house and demanded he come out so he could be arrested. The ferryman refused, and when the crowd forced their way into his house, he opened fire, hitting Deputy Knowles Daunt through the door. No one else tried to force their way into Cresap's house after that. Daunt died of his wounds, prompting Pennsylvania Deputy Governor Patrick Gordon to demand Cresap be arrested for murder. Instead, Maryland Governor Samuel Ogle made Cresap a militia captain. On the night of November 25, 1736, Sheriff Samuel Smith had decided he had had enough of Cresap’s mischief, and gathered a posse of 24 armed “non-Quakers” to arrest him. Cresap refused to surrender, so the posse set his house on fire. He attempted to escape to the river, but members of the posse jumped in his boat before he could get away. Cresap shoved one of his attackers overboard and yelled, “Cresap’s getting away”, prompting the rest of the posse to beat “Cresap” until they discovered the trick. The real Cresap was cornered in Lancaster, where the blacksmith approached to put him in chains. Cresap knocked him out in one blow, but even that was not enough to prevent his arrest. He was hauled to Philadelphia and paraded through the streets before being imprisoned. Cresap, apparently still in good spirits, joked that Philadelphia was “one of the prettiest towns in Maryland”.

Following Cresap’s arrest, Maryland petitioned King George II of England to break up the conflict until the chancery suit was resolved. King George followed through with the petition nearly a year later, on August 18, 1737, ordering both sides to end their hostilities. This proclamation was unheeded, even in Cresap's absence, resulting in another round of petitions to the king. To end the violence, the royal Committee for Plantation Affairs arranged for the two colonies to sign a peace treaty in London on May 25, 1738. Both sides agreed to stand down until the chancery suit had ended. This marked the end of conflict between settlers in the region, known as Cresap's War, but the legal battle over the land was far from over.

The agreement also declared a temporary border 15.25 miles south of Philadelphia to the east of the Susquehanna River, and 14.47 miles south of Philadelphia to the west. These lines were to be accepted immediately and without question. The temporary border was held without much conflict while "the Great Chancery Suit" dragged on. In 1750, High Chancellor Lord Hardwicke finally issued his verdict. The northern boundary of Maryland was to continue to be 15 miles south of Philadelphia, as in the 1732 agreement. Commissioners were to be appointed within the next three months to survey the boundaries, which was to be completed by 1752. He also ruled that the infamous circle around New Castle had a radius of twelve miles and was centered around the center of New Castle. Cape Henlopen, for the purposes of the 1732 agreement, was to be where the corresponding map said it was, even though it was inaccurate.

The Commissioners met for the first time in New Castle on November 14, 1750 to survey the Twelve Mile Circle. They decided the courthouse was at the center of town, but were unable to proceed further because of logistical disagreements. The Marylanders wanted the line to run up and down hills and valley, while the Pennsylvanians wanted to use a level line. They decided to bring the matter to the High Chancellor and wait for his verdict.

At the same time, another team was dispatched to survey the southern Delaware boundary, which would come to be called the Transpeninsular Line. They were to lay this line all the way across the peninsula, and find the midpoint, which would determine where the western border of Delaware began. They began in April 1750, and on June 12, had reached Slaughter Creek, 66 miles west of the aptly-named Initial Point on the Atlantic coast. Slaughter Creek, a small waterway that fed into the Chesapeake Bay, was also where a new dispute arose. Recall that the 1732 agreement placed the opening of the Chesapeake Bay as the terminus of the Transpeninsular Line. The Marylanders wanted to stop at the creek, claiming that it counted as part of the bay, but the Pennsylvanians wanted to continue to the main part of the Chesapeake because Slaughter Creek was a mere two feet at low tide and so didn't deserve to be the border. The main waters of the Chesapeake were three miles further west, which would make the southern border 33 miles long instead of 34.5. It should go without saying that both parties were arguing in favor of the situation that gave their colony the most land. They, like the Twelve Mile Circle surveyors, referred to the High Chancellor, and while waiting for his response began placing the stone markers along the area they had already surveyed.

It would not be for another ten years that the High Chancellor resolved both disputes. The Twelve Mile Circle team was to use a level line, and the transpeninsular team was to extend the line the extra three miles. There were no more disputes after the July 1760 decision. At long last, the Twelve Mile Circle and Delaware's southern boundary had been properly surveyed and demarcated.

But this was not quite the end. There were still two lines left to survey: the Pennsylvania-Maryland east-west line that ran due west of the Twelve Mile Circle, and the Maryland-Delaware north-south line that ran between the Twelve Mile Circle and the Transpeninsular Line. These proved more difficult to survey than the previous two (physically difficult, not difficult due to the bickering that had prolonged this dispute for the last eighty years). After several failed attempts, the surveyors were recalled and two English scientists were hired instead. Their names were Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon, and they arrived in Philadelphia on November 15, 1763. They started on Maryland's northern border, traveling fifteen miles south from Philadelphia and building an observatory for reference. They then headed west until the Indians in the region stopped them from progressing further. In September 1764, they surveyed the shorter north-south line. After stopping in November to attain the Commissioners' approval for their survey, Mason and Dixon began placing monuments under the Commissioners' supervision. The whole endeavor concluded on October 9, 1767, and the pair of surveyors left for England on September 11 the next year. Calvert and the Penns petitioned King George III of England to approve the new boundaries, which he did on January 11, 1769, finally putting the 85-year-old dispute to rest.

Or at least, that should have been the end, but it appears that this border dispute refused to die. It turned out that the north-south line did not quite match up with the Twelve Mile Circle, leaving a small wedge between the circle and the lines Mason and Dixon surveyed with an unknown owner. Maryland certainly did not own it, as it was east of Mason's and Dixon's lines, and Maryland was only entitled to land to its west. As for the other two, Delaware was still technically just a part of Pennsylvania and not a separate colony, so there was no pressing need for the Penns to determine which part it belonged to. Both Pennsylvania and Delaware claimed the land, but no official conflict arose over it, probably because it was only one square mile. It was not until 1849 that Pennsylvania was reminded of the Wedge by a recent survey and once again claimed the Wedge. This survey, conducted by Lieutenant Colonel James D. Graham, appeared to decide the Wedge in Pennsylvania's favor. But the matter was not resolved until decades later. Due to the uncertain jurisdiction over the area it became a common place for illegal activities like dogfights and duels around the early to mid-19th century.

In 1889, Delaware and Pennsylvania finally resolved to appoint commissioners to resolve the issue of the Wedge. On March 16, three years later, Colonel W.C. Hodgkins of the US Coast and Geodetic Survey met with Philadelphian Benjamin Smith and Wilmingtonian Daniel Farra in Philadelphia to begin discussing the survey. Their goal was to find authentic markers of the Twelve Mile Circle that were written about in the 1701 survey report. After a long and thorough search, they were only able to come up with four, including:

1. The remains of an old house on the Delaware River where the 1701 survey concluded.
2. The boundaries of some farms between the Brandywine Creek and the Concord Pike, farmland that was supposed to end at the state border.
3. An 'S' curve in the Brandywine Creek described as the northern terminus of the Twelve Mile Circle in the 1701 report.
4. An old hickory stump that marked the line between Chester County, PA and New Castle County, DE.

Due to the lack of markers, the surveyors could not exactly determine where the Twelve Mile Circle laid. They decided to draw two arcs. One started at a point on the extension of the east-west line twelve miles from the New Castle courthouse (the center of the circle) and continue to the hickory stump. The second would start at the stump, pass through the Brandywine's 'S' curve, and would end on the remains of the old house. They began the survey that year and finished in 1893. New, larger monuments were laid along the new arcs, with one side labeled 'P' for Pennsylvania and the other 'D' for Delaware. The starting point for this first arc was 2000 feet to the east of the previously accepted point of intersection between the two states, creating a "horn" running from the east-west line to the stump, producing a second area whose ownership was in question. Luckily, the Commissioners quickly resolved them, awarding the Horn to Pennsylvania and the Wedge to Delaware. The survey report, and therefore the Commissioners' allotments, were ratified by the Pennsylvania Assembly in June 1897, but Delaware held out. There were some people living in the Horn who considered themselves Delawarean, and did not appreciate suddenly finding themselves in Pennsylvania. It took them until March 1921 to ratify it. In June later that year, Congress, too, ratified the survey, at long last bringing a 100% close to the story. So even though this long-standing border conflict effectively resolved in 1769, it could be argued that it lasted all the way until 1921.

The pair of lines that Mason and Dixon surveyed, particularly the one running east-west, would go on to be culturally significant. The first instance of it being called the Mason-Dixon Line, of course after the two surveyors, was in 1820, during the Missouri Crisis debates. Congress had noticed that this (relatively) straight line just so happened to form a neat boundary between the northern antislavery states and the southern pro-slavery states on the east coast (which received most of the focus, as most Americans lived there). At a time when the debate over slavery was becoming a national issue, the line became a handy way to refer to the divide between the North and South. It also happens to be the origin of the South's nickname of Dixie. Though referred to less today, the Mason-Dixon Line is still known as the dividing line between the North and South, but it also serves as the end to a near-century of border disputes between Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Delaware.
 


Title: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania founded
Description: 


Title: Plant cutter riots in Gloucester County, Virginia
Description: 


Title: William Penn leases Delaware from the Duke of York
Description: 


Title: Delaware annexed into Pennsylvania
Description: 


Title: Second Beaver War
Description: 


Title: Gove's Rebellion
Description: A failed uprising led by Edward Gove in New Hampshire. Many colonists were upset that they had a royally appointed governor, Edward Cranfield. In 1683, Cranfield dissolved the colony's locally elected council after he was unable to pass revenue bill, assuming direct control over New Hampshire. Gove, a member of the former council decided to rebel against Cranfield, and gathered around fifteen supporters. They were caught by the militia, most of whom were set free. Gove, on the other hand, was convicted with high treason and was imprisoned in the Tower of London. He was sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, but was set free after three years instead.


Title: Frame of Government of Pennsylvania
Description: A document outlining the Pennsylvanian government, guaranteeing a representative assembly and religious freedom for all. There was no official church, nor required attendance to religious services. However, as assuming office required swearing that Jesus Christ was divine, Jews were essentially barred from the government. The document provided inspiration for a republican government while drafting the US Constitution, as well as including the idea for religious freedom.


Title: Hull Mint closed
Description: 


Title: Charter of Liberties and Privileges
Description: A law passed by the newly created New York elected assembly. It established an election cycle of three years, of which landowning males and freemen of New York City could participate. It granted its citizens traditional English rights, such as the protection of property, religious toleration of all Protestant denominations, and the right to a jury trial.


Title: Fort St. Louis established
Description: 


Title: New York becomes a royal colony
Description: 


Title: Reign of King James II
Description: 


Title: Arkansas Post established
Description: 


Title: Dominion of New England
Description: 


Title: Dominion of New England founded
Description: The giant colony, named the Dominion of England, was composed of several previous colonies in America, namely Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, Plymouth, New Hampshire, New York, West Jersey, and East Jersey. Former Governor of New York Sir Edmund Andros was appointed to head the new colony, with no elected assembly. Andros established a tyrannical rule, enforcing taxes the colonists did not consent to, declared that all land grants were null and void unless he said otherwise, and required religious toleration of all Protestants, endangering the strict Puritan social order. The colony would not last long, being dissolved into its previous components during a series of revolts in 1689 spurred by the Glorious Revolution.


Title: Sir Edmund Andros becomes Governor of New England
Description: 


Title: Reverend John Wise jailed
Description: 


Title: Yamasee move to South Carolina
Description: 


Title: Fort St. Louis abandoned
Description: 


Title: King William's War
Description: A conflict fought between two alliances, both of a European power and a Native American ally; one consisting of England and the Iroquois Confederacy, and the other composed of France and the Wabanaki Confederacy. It was the North American theater of the Nine Years' War, and was the first French and Indian War.

The English-allied Iroquois controlled the fur trade, and by 1688 refused to trade with New France to secure economic dominance for themselves and their allies. The French proceeded to raid the Seneca lands, prompting an English raid on Lachine. Meanwhile, French-friendly tribes in French Acadia allied to form the Wabanaki Confederacy as revenge for losing King Phillip's War. After the Nine Years' War broke out, fighting began between the two factions in North America.

After some skirmishes around modern-day Maine, Wabanaki warriors in June 1689 raided New Hampshire and successfully defeated the English force dispatched to counter them. The French then destroyed the English fort at Pemaquid. English forces led by Major Benjamin Church began to push the Wabanaki out of Maine, but were defeated and the residents of Maine were nearly all massacred by the French and Wabanaki.

By 1690, British commander Sir William Phips captured Port Royal, the capital of Acadia. Brutal fighting continued between both sides for the next four years. In 1696, the French-Wabanaki alliance raided Pemaquid, followed by the destruction of most English settlements in Newfoundland. The English colonists were weak and those in New York did little to help their Iroquois allies. In 1697, the French and English signed the Treaty of Ryswick, restoring captured lands to their previous states and ending the war.


Title: West Jersey, East Jersey, and New York added to New England
Description: 


Title: Glorious Revolution
Description: A coup in England that saw the Parliament gain ultimate authority over the government, rather than sharing its power with the reigning monarch. In 1687, King James II of England declared religious tolerance of Protestant Dissenters and Catholics, spurring the English people to worry about a tyrannical Catholic king in power. Aristocrats encouraged William of Orange, a Dutch noble and husband of King James II's (Protestant) daughter, to usurp the throne. William arrived in November 1688 backed by over 20,000 troops, most of them Dutch. Most aristocrats abandoned James, causing him to flee. William of Orange became King William III of England. The 1690 Toleration Act allowed Protestant Dissenters to practice freely, though only Anglicans could hold office. The American colonies saw a tightening of religious control over Christian minorities.


Title: <i>Two Treatises of Government</i>
Description: English philosopher John Locke wrote <i>Two Treatises of Government</i>, an influential work of political philosophy from the Enlightenment.

The first treatise was less important, being a direct reply to Sir Robert Filmer's work, Patriarcha, in which he argues for the divine right of kings, because their power was descended from Adam, biblically the first man and king. Locke believed this contradicted common sense, as this divine grant could not be found in any historical record, and rebuked the idea that a contract between God and Adam could be binding for the latter's descendants many generations later.

However, Locke is more known for the second treatise. He wrote that political power was driven by moral obligations; the government had to make laws for "the public good." The prevailing philosophy at the time was that government was analogous to family, in that it was natural that certain people had more power than others. Locke argued that when a human is born, they are naturally free and equal to all other humans, subject only to God. Humans had a divinely ordained duty to carry out the laws of nature, such as by punishing those who break that law. However, granting that power to any particular person would only lead to anarchy and injustice. To remedy this, humans will enter an implicit "social contract" with each other, granting consent to the government to be governed. This grants the people security in exchange for a small amount of liberty. Specifically, it was the government's duty to protect its subject's "natural rights," or ones every human was entitled to upon birth: the right to life, liberty, and property. the government ought to be divided between legislative, executive, and judicial powers. These all required the consent of the majority to function. If the government failed to protect these rights, the people were entitled to overthrow it. Locke included one's own body under "property"; no one was entitled to another's labor without permission. Additionally, anything an individual helps to create through their body is their property, as well.

The second treatise was revolutionary in changing the way people thought about government. It provided heavy inspiration for Thomas Jefferson's Declaration of Independence, in which he wrote that everyone is entitled to "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness" (he removed property from the list because of his condemnation of slavery). It inspired the American people to overthrow the government they believed had failed to protect their natural rights. Indeed, George Washington believed Locke to be "the greatest man who had ever lived."


Title: Zia Pueblo Massacre
Description: 


Title: Reign of King William III
Description: 


Title: 1689 Boston Revolt
Description: An uprising in Boston, MA that saw the imprisonment of New England Governor Sir Edmund Andros. Andros was not popular among New Englanders, as he ignored or dissolved local elected assemblies, revoked the validity of old land grants, enforced the Navigation Acts the colonists despised, and supported the Church of England in a region where Puritanism was dominant. Furthermore, people were excited by the news of the Glorious Revolution, as the popish King James they feared had been deposed. They desired to create a revolution of their own, to get rid of Andros, who they believed to be tyrannical. On April 18, groups of militia gathered in Boston, who proceeded to March around the city and began arresting Anglicans and Andros' supporters, including the governor himself. By noon, 1500 more militiamen had entered the city and joined the rebellion. They took control of a few forts, including Fort Mary (where Andros had been captured) and Fort William on Castle Island. Andros made two escape attempts, but was caught both times and placed in solitary confinement. When the rest of New England got wind of the situation, they moved to restore their old governments, complete with representative assemblies. As a result, the Dominion of New England collapsed, and England made no move to restore it thanks to the regime change.


Title: Dominion of New England collapses
Description: 


Title: Toleration Act 1689
Description: A law passed by Parliament granting freedom to worship to Protestant nonconformists (those who didn't conform to the Church of England) provided they take the Oath of Allegiance (in which one swears loyalty to the monarchy) and the Oath of Supremacy (in which one swears that the reigning monarch is the supreme leader of the Church of England). Furthermore, they had to reject the teachings of transubstantiation, the belief of the Roman Catholic Church that the substance offered in the sacrifice of the sacrament during the Mass become the body and blood of Christ. The law did not include nontrinitarians (those that do not believe God is composed of the Holy Trinity), as well as Roman Catholics.


Title: Leisler's Rebellion
Description: An uprising in New York led by German American merchant and militia captain Jacob Leisler. He was a Calvinist that believed King James II of England was trying to force popery on the colonies. It began on May 31, when the local militia rebelled against Lieutenant Governor Francis Nicholson after learning of a (probably false) rumor that he planned to burn down a city. The militia, led by Leisler, captured Fort James, which contained a powder magazine they believed was important for defending the colony from Native American raids. By extension, they controlled the harbor, meaning they could circumvent Nicholson's authority concerning ships. They demanded the Nicholson be replaced by a better governor. Nicholson left for England on June 6, granting Leisler effective control over the New York government. He cleared the government of Nicholson's men and appointed his own, collecting taxes and customs duties.

On the eve of 1691, King William III of England commissioned Henry Sloughter to be governor, along with his lieutenant Major Richard Ingoldesby. The lieutenant governor demanded Leisler stand down, but he did not have the papers with him to prove that Sloughter was the new legitimate governor. Skirmishes broke out between the two groups for six weeks. Leisler eventually surrendered, and was subsequently charged with treason along with ten of his followers. Leisler and his son-in-law Jacob Milborne were hanged on May 16.

Pro-Leisler and anti-Leisler factions would continue to divide he province for some time. Though it is often depicted as Dutch settlers that desired to remove English power from the former Dutch colony, the rebellion was more similar to many other rebellions of the time, including 1676's Bacon's Rebellion in Virginia, 1677's Culpeper's Rebellion in North Carolina, 1683's Gove's Rebellion in New Hampshire, 1689's Boston revolt, and 1689's Maryland Uprising in that the rebels were all middle-class merchants or planters discontented with the elite's tight grip on the government that the former felt they had little de facto say in.


Title: Maryland Uprising
Description: A rebellion of Puritans spurred by the Glorious Revolution overthrew the colony's proprietary government. Protestants feared that the new King James II was too pro-Catholic, and began to arm themselves to take over the colony. In 1689, encouraged by the new pro-Protestant King William III, Colonel John Coode led several hundred Puritans against Catholic planter Colonel Henry Darnell, forcing him to surrender. Coode established a new government banning Catholicism and from Catholics holding office.


Title: Lachine Massacre
Description: 


Title: English Bill of Rights
Description: An act signed by King William III and Queen Mary II of England. It enumerated James II's many transgressions against the people of England, reprimanding him for acting without the consent of Parliament. It confirmed that William and Mary were the new rightful rulers of the Kingdom of England. Most importantly, it contained thirteen articles that outlined freedoms of the kingdom's subjects, including:
-monarchs cannot suspend or execute laws without Parliament's consent
-monarchs cannot ignore or execute the law the way that James did
-the commission that created the Court of Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes is illegal, as is all similar commissions and courts
-freedom from royal taxation without Parliament's consent
-subjects May petition monarchs, and the monarchs May not prosecute them for it
-a standing army May not be kept in the kingdom during peacetime without the consent of Parliament
-Protestants have the right to bear arms for the right to self-defense
-free elections for members of Parliament (MPs)
-freedom of speech in Parliament
-no excessive bail or fines, as well as cruel and unusual punishment
-jurors must be properly chosen
-no promises of "fines and forfeitures" for particular people before conviction
-Parliament shall be held frequently to address citizens' concerns and for "amending, strengthening, and preserving of the laws"

These enumerated what were believed to be the fundamental rights for all (Protestant) Englishmen. Many of these rights, like protection against cruel and unusual punishment, would be made into US laws a century later.

Full Text
https://bit.ly/2GoEouP


Title: Colonial population is 210,372
Description: 


Title: Massachusetts begins issuing paper money
Description: 


Title: Spain constructs missions in Eastern Texas
Description: 


Title: Schenectady Massacre
Description: 


Title: Carolina slave codes
Description: 


Title: George Keith controversy
Description: 


Title: Virginia bans interracial marriage
Description: The Virginia General Assembly outlawed interracial marriage. Before this, only three such unions occurred in the colony, one of them being the famous marriage between John Rolfe and Pocahontas. The law was an attempt to drive a wedge between whites and blacks. After Bacon's Rebellion, states began switching to race-based chattel slavery as their main means of labor. In order to justify this system, authorities needed to dehumanize blacks to prevent sympathy towards them, which could undo the labor system that the colonies were based around. Hence, outlawing interracial marriage helped to separate the two races from each other.


Title: Province of Massachusetts Bay chartered as a royal colony
Description: Massachusetts Bay was chartered as an English colonial province (shown in white and yellow), rather than being controlled by a company. It included the former colonies of Massachusetts Bay and Plymouth, as well as Maine, New Brunswick, Martha's Vineyard, Nantucket, and Nova Scotia. It removed certain rights the colonies had enjoyed through self-determination, with elected Bostonian officials being replaced by royally appointed Governor Sir William Phips.


Title: Candlemas Massacre
Description: 


Title: Salem Witch Trials
Description: A series of accusations against supposed witches in Salem, MA. It started when three girls began behaving strangely, which the town's religious leaders took to be the result of witchcraft. The girls' family slave was accused, and the only way she could get out of being hanged was to confess and name other 'witches.' This cultivated accusations against others, with many being used to settle old scores with each other. By the end of the ordeal, over 200 people (mostly women) had been accused of and confessed to being witches, even though they had done nothing wrong in reality. Eventually, the original three girls admitted they had made up the story for fun, but Salem's religious leaders refused to back down, claiming that the accused must be guilty because of their confessions. Fourteen women and five men were hanged, and five died in jail. Additionally, one man who refused to say if he was guilty or not was sentenced to be pressed to death with stones. However, despite popular legend, there were none burned at the stake. Massachusetts Governor Sir William Phips realized the flaws in the colony's judicial system, and ordered everyone accused of witchcraft to be released. At the same time, Puritan minister Cotton Mather released a document, Cases of Conscience Concerning Evil Spirits, instructed the people not to take such accusations or confessions seriously. The witchcraft epidemic dissipated soon after.


Title: Spanish recapture of Santa Fe
Description: 


Title: Carolina begins growing rice
Description: 


Title: Capital of Maryland moved from Saint Mary's City to Anne Arundels Towne
Description: 


Title: La Matanza
Description: 


Title: Boards of Trade established
Description: 


Title: Cahokia, Illinois established
Description: 


Title: Navigation Act 1696
Description: Part of the Navigation Acts, it was a law banning goods from being exported, imported, or carried between English possessions in Asia, Africa, or the Americas, as well as being shipped to England or Wales by foreign ships. It placed further restrictions surrounding purchasing bonds for shipping, as well as paying customs duties. It was the last of the Navigation Acts.


Title: Treaty of Ryswick
Description: 


Title: Free blacks ordered to leave Virginia
Description: 


Title: Parliament bans export of colonial woolens
Description: 


Title: Virginian capital moved to Williamsburg
Description: 


Title: Wool Act 1699
Description: 


Title: <i>The Selling of Joseph</i>
Description: 


Title: Colonial population is 250,888
Description: 


Title: José Romo de Vivar settles in the Huachuca Mountains
Description: 


Title: Neutrality treaty between New France and the Iroquois
Description: 


Title: New England colonies commit to a diversified economy
Description: 


Title: William Kidd arrested in Boston
Description: 


Title: Collegiate school at Saybrook founded
Description: 


Title: Mobile, Alabama founded
Description: 


Title: Third Frame of Government of Pennsylvania
Description: 


Title: Delaware Colony founded
Description: After New Netherland was captured by England in 1664, Delaware had reMained part of Maryland. When Pennsylvania was chartered in 1681, William Penn was granted Delaware as well. However, the Pennsylvanians and Delawareans disliked each other, and in 1701 Penn decided to grant the latter their own representative assembly, though they were still controlled by the same governor. The two colonies would continue in this relationship until 1776, when it declared independence from Great Britain.


Title: Carolina attacks St. Augustine
Description: 


Title: Reign of Queen Anne
Description: 


Title: Province of New Jersey founded
Description: The two colonies of East and West Jersey were combined after nearly thirty years since they were divided. New Jersey received a royal charter from Queen Anne of England, making it a royal colony.


Title: Queen Anne's War
Description: A war fought mainly between England and France over control of North America. It is often viewed as the North American theater for the War of Spanish Succession in Europe. It is known as the second the French and Indian Wars. The conflict started in Europe in 1701, when Spanish King Charles II died, causing issues over his successor. King Philip was set to assume the throne, but was also in line for the French throne, and the other powerful European nations were afraid of such a powerful union. So in early 1702, English King William III threw his support behind the Hapsburg family of the Holy Roman Empire as the true heirs to the throne. In March, King William III died as was succeeded by Queen Anne. In May, Queen Anne declared war on France and Spain, and allied her country with the Netherlands, Portugal, Prussia, Savoy, and the Holy Roman Empire. In North America, the main fighting was in New England and Quebec. The colonists were left unsupported by the English military, and were mostly outmatched by the French. However, the English did enjoy several successes, such as the defense of Charleston, SC in 1706 and the capture of St. Augustine in Spanish Florida. After several failed attacks on French Canada, such as at Fort Royal in 1704, the British finally sent troops and supplies to the colonies by 1710. With their support, the British captured the French province of Acadia. In 1711, nearly 1000 Englishmen were lost via shipwrecks above Anticost. Despite this, the English began to gain more momentum, and by 1713 the war had ended with the Peace of Utrecht, resulting in significant gains for the English.

Deaths:
900 English troops
350 English colonists
Few English-allied Native Americans

50-60 Spanish troops
50 French-allied Native Americans
Heavy Spanish-allied Native Americans
Unknown French casualties


Title: Kaskaskia, Illinois established
Description: 


Title: Political factionism riot in Charleston, Carolina
Description: 


Title: Apalachee Massacre
Description: 


Title: Carolina allows the arming of slaves during wartime
Description: 


Title: Delaware General Assembly esablished
Description: 


Title: Riot of young gentry in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Description: 


Title: Deerfield Massacre
Description: 


Title: Privateersman's riot in New York
Description: 


Title: Virginia Slave Codes
Description: 


Title: Albuquerque, New Mexico founded
Description: 


Title: Benjamin Church fails to take Port Royal
Description: 


Title: Act of Union Creating Great Britain
Description: A union between the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, forming the country of Great Britain.


Title: Colonial population is 331,711
Description: 


Title: Francis Nicholson captures Port Royal
Description: 


Title: Anti-impressment riot in New York
Description: 


Title: Cary's Rebellion in Carolina
Description: 


Title: Dutch church riot in Flatbrush, New York
Description: 


Title: The British fail to capture Quebec City
Description: 


Title: Tuscarora War
Description: A war between the British, Dutch, and German settlers of North Carolina and the Southern Tuscarora tribe.

The Southern Tuscarora, led by Chief Hancock, launched a series of assaults along with Pamplico, Cothechney, Coree, Mattamuskeet, and Machapunga against the Europeans as revenge for encroachment, disease, and selling the Tuscarora into slavery. On September 22, they attacked and killed hundreds of colonial settlers. In response, along with assistance from South Carolina, Governor Edward Hyde put together a force of 528 men commanded by Colonel John Barnwell. His force was mostly composed of Native Americans, such as Captain Jack, a commander in Barnwell's force, along with Major Mackay and Captain William Bull. They attacked the Tuscarora on January 29, 1712 at their forts. He then marched to Fort Hancock, the main Tuscarora base, reaching it on March 1. By that time, many Native Americans in Barnwell's force had died or left to sell their new Tuscarora captives into slavery. Meanwhile, new European reinforcements from elsewhere in North Carolina, pushing the ratio of Europeans to Native Americans in his party up. He laid siege to Fort Hancock, but negotiated a peace treaty with the tribe due to his force's waning numbers and strength, as well as the fact that the Tuscarora had began torturing their captives.

For the North Carolinians, this was unacceptable. They persuaded Chief Tom Blount, chief of the neutral Northern Tuscarora, to take out Hancock. He did so, and Hancock was executed later that year. Barnwell was recalled and replaced by James Moore, who also mostly commanded Native Americans (over 900), including Yamasee and Cherokee. Moore's men killed or captured 950 Tuscarora, causing the rest to flee to New York.

The Tuscarora signed a treaty with the North Carolinians in June 1718, giving them land (that they already occupied) by the Roanoke River. The remaining Southern Tuscarora were forcefully relocated to the area. In 1722, the Tuscarora leader proclaimed everyone still in the South was to no longer be considered part of the tribe. Meanwhile, North Carolina chartered the designated Tuscarora land as Bertie County, and gradually began eroding it with speculators.

It is estimated to be the deadliest war in North Carolina's history as a colony.

Deaths:
200 whites
1000 Native Americans


Title: Massacre at Bath
Description: 


Title: Fox Indian Massacre
Description: 


Title: Fox Wars
Description: 


Title: Massacre at Fort Narhantes
Description: 


Title: Province of Carolina partitioned
Description: The Province of Carolina was divided into two separate colonies. The division began in 1669, when the Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina were passed. This divided Carolina into two provinces, Albemarle in the north and Clarendon in the south. The divide continued in 1691, when separate governors were appointed to each province. In 1712, the division became official; Carolina was split into North and South Carolina. However, the two colonies continued to be ruled under the Lords Proprietors until 1719, when a rebellion prompted Great Britain to appoint a royal governor instead.


Title: NYC Slave Revolt of 1712
Description: A slave uprising in New York City, NY. When New Netherland was captured by the English in 1664, they tightened restrictions on slaves' rights. However, in New York City, slaves were not only numerous (being around 1/5 of the city's total population), but also lived close by each other, allowing for easier communication to conspire against their masters. On the night of April 6, around 20 slaves set fire to a building and attacked the white colonists who tried to put it out. The rebellion was soon put down, with the militia capturing and jailing seventy blacks. 27 were put on trial, with 21 convicted and executed. 20 were burned at the stake and one was killed with a Catherine wheel, a punishment illegal to administer to whites at the time. An additional six committed suicide while in jail. The New York government proceeded to restrict slave rights even further. Slaves could not gather in groups of more than three, carry firearms, or gamble. Slaves convicted of rape, property damage, and conspiracy to kill could be executed. Slave owners desiring to free their slaves would now have to pay a substantial fee. Overall, slaves ended up in a worse situation after the rebellion than before.

Deaths:
9 whites
26 black slaves


Title: Fort Neoheroka Massacre
Description: 


Title: Treaty of Utrecht
Description: A treaty between the belligerents of Queen Anne's War that ended said conflict. It recognized King Philip V as the King of Spain, but forced him to renounce his claims to the French throne, ensuring that Spain and France would not unify. Furthermore, Spain ceded Gibraltar to Great Britain and Sicily to Savoy. France ceded Newfoundland, Rupert's Land, and Nova Scotia to Great Britain. Most importantly, Great Britain was granted a monopoly over the asiento, the slave trade between Africa and Spanish America, from the Dutch. This allowed Great Britain to become the largest commercial power in Europe.


Title: Natchitoches established
Description: 


Title: Reign of King George I
Description: 


Title: Massacre at St. Bartholomew's Parish
Description: 


Title: Yamasee War
Description: A large conflict between South Carolinians and a variety of Native American tribes, including but not limited to the Yamasee, Ochese Creeks, Catawba, Cherokee, Waxhaw, and Santee.

The war stemmed from several conflicts. One of these was the aftermath of the Tuscarora War, in which North Carolinians received support from several Native American tribes (indeed, those tribes made up most of the Carolinian fighting force). This brought the initially disunified tribes closer together. One such tribe was the Yamasee, who were allied with the British, profiting off of trade with them. However, the British demand for Native American slaves and deerskin began to outpace the demand by 1715. leaving the Yamasee concerned that they themselves would be enslaved next. The tribes quickly amassed debt with the British, who they had come to rely on for supplies, as most of the available land in Carolina had been bought out by the island nation. Similar sentiments arose in the Ochese (Lower) Creeks.

After learning of a plot by the Ochese Creeks to attack, the South Carolinian government sent representative to the Yamasee for assistance. The tribe decided instead to attack the South Carolinians, slaughtering them in their sleep in an event known as the Pocotaligo Massacre. They then attacked St. Bartholomew's Parish, killing over one hundred people, as well as destroying plantations and taking prisoners. The South Carolinian militia numbering at about 250 engaged an equally sized Yamasee force. Alexander McKay followed by 100 men headed south towards a fortified encampment of Yamasee, ambushing and inflicting heavy casualties upon them. Meanwhile, British traders also suffered at the hands of the Yamasee, with 90% of the ones in the colonies when the war broke out being killed in the first few weeks.

The Catawba joined in the war soon after it started, killing Carolinian (but not Virginian) traders. On May 17, 26 out of 90 cavalry were killed by a ambush of Catawba, Wateree, and Sarraw warriors. The tribes then attacked and killed 19 out of the 30 defenders of a fort on Benjamin Schenkingh's plantation after claiming to desire peace talks. On June 13, 70 militiamen led by George Chicken ambushed the Catawba warriors. The tribe decided after that to make peace, and even militarily assist the colonists.

Unfortunately for South Carolina, the militia was starting to collapse, with many members deserting, even leaving the colony altogether. Instead, South Carolina Governor Charles Craven put together a professional paid army of nearly 1500, made of South Carolinians, Virginians, Native Americans, North Carolinians, and slaves. This was to combat the Ochese Creeks, a powerful Native American tribe waging war with the South Carolinians from the north. In fact, they are often viewed as having instigated the war just as much as the Yamasee. The Cherokee, on the other hand, were split on the war. The Lower and Middle Cherokee (especially Caesar, a Middle Cherokee chief) were generally opposed to the South Carolinians, while the Overhill Cherokee (who lived farthest away from South Carolina) wanted an alliance with the settlers. On January 27, 1716, South Carolinians found that a group of Cherokee had killed a dozen Creek at Tugaloo, claiming it was a war party. This forced an alliance between the South Carolinians and the Cherokee, and consequently a war between the Cherokee and Creek. This alliance was critical in the defense of the colonists, as even the large army Craven had organized was failing to protect the settlers from raids. By late 1717, the war was mostly over, though a few Native American tribes remained hostile towards the South Carolinians.

The colonists began to blame the Lords Proprietors, the owners of Carolina, for mismanaging the war. They called for the colonies to receive royal charters, which they did in 729. The withdrawal of the Yamasee from the area also allowed the colony of Georgia to be founded. The Yamasee was completely devastated by the war, with 25% left dead or enslaved, and the rest joined other tribes. The Catawba took over as the most powerful tribe in the region, even establishing an alliance with South Carolina.

Casualties:
7% of South Carolina's white citizenry
White casualties numbered in the hundreds, while Native American casualties numbered in the thousands.


Title: Pocotaligo Massacre
Description: 


Title: Schenkingh Plantation Massacre
Description: 


Title: Natchez Wars
Description: 


Title: Blackbeard killed
Description: 


Title: Mission San Antonio de Valero built
Description: 


Title: New Orleans, Louisiana founded
Description: 


Title: Riotous seizure of record in North Carolina
Description: 


Title: Anti-customs riot in Newport, Rhode Island
Description: 


Title: Overthrow of the Proprietor in South Carolina
Description: 


Title: Virginia increases tariff on slaves
Description: Non-slaveholding farmers in Virginia persuade the Virginia General Assembly to discuss a prohibition of slavery or a ban on importing slaves. In response, the assembly raises the tariff on slaves to five pounds, which about equals the full price of an indenture, so as not to make importation of slaves as initially attractive or preferable to a mere indenture for a term of years.


Title: Cato's Letters
Description: Cato's Letters were a series of 144 essays written by Brits Thomas Gordon and John Trenchard under the pseudonym Cato, an ancient Roman and stalwart defender of republicanism. They were originally published as "Essays on Liberty, Civil, and Religious" in the London Journal, and criticized the British government for being corrupt, immoral, and tyrannical. The essays had little effect on the British public, but were received much more passionately in the colonies, where they helped to influence American opinions against the British government.


Title: Colonial population is 466,185
Description: 


Title: Fort Niagara built
Description: 


Title: Pawnee defeat the Villasaur expedition
Description: 


Title: Slaves are the majority of the population in South Carolina
Description: 


Title: Chickasaw Wars
Description: 


Title: Land treaty between South Carolina and the Cherokee
Description: 


Title: Salutary Neglect
Description: 


Title: Tuscarora ally with the Iroquois
Description: The Iroquois Confederacy (Five Nations) allied with the Tuscarora Native Americans from the Southeast, forming the Six Nations.


Title: Father Rale's War
Description: A war between the New England colonists and the Wabanaki Confederacy. Since the Treaty of Utrecht had not been signed by the Wabanaki, the land ceded was still recognized by them as under their control. As the British began to settle into their land, the Wabanaki pushed back. After negotiations were refused by the settlers, several raids were conducted by the Wabanaki on British settlements. After the capital of Annapolis Royal was besieged, the colonists declared war. Wabanaki led by Gray Lock made successful attacks in western Massachusetts,The rest of 1722 involved a successful defense put up by the British in New England, but were unable to launch a successful counterattack. Meanwhile, in Nova Scotia, colonists killed 25 Native Americans at the Battle of Winnepang, while losing only two themselves. A few months into 1723, the Wabanaki conducted over a dozen raids in and around Maine. In 1724, a British offensive of about 20 were destroyed by Wabanaki warriors, who spared only their Native American guides. In retaliation, the British attacked a large Wabanaki village called Norridgewock, killing a local chief, Native American leader and secret Canadian agent Father Rale, as well as a couple dozen others. British Captain John Lovewall conducted a few raids against the Wabanaki in the winter of 1724-1725, with the third against the Pequawket warriors, in which the British attack force was compromised, though they killed Pequawket Chief Paugus. Despite French protest, the Penobscot Native Americans asked for peace, who succeeded in getting most of the Wabanaki to do the same (except for Gray Lock, who would continue until 1727). Consequentially, British hold around Maine tightened, and no major war would occur in the region for about 30 years.


Title: Fort Orleans established
Description: 


Title: Virginia slave conspiracy law
Description: 


Title: French Code Noir implemented in Louisiana
Description: 


Title: Norridgewock Massacre
Description: 


Title: Riot against pillories and stocks in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Description: 


Title: Fort Oswego built
Description: 


Title: Treaty of Nikwasi
Description: 


Title: Reign of King George II
Description: 


Title: Junto opened
Description: Junto, a debate club designed for self-betterment, was opened in Philadelphia, PA by Benjamin Franklin. He and eleven other members engaged in moral, political, and philosophical debate. It eventually became the American Philosophical Society, a much larger organization that even invited some lower-class citizens in their debates. This helped to get the average person involved in political discourse.


Title: Baltimore, Maryland founded
Description: 


Title: Lords Proprietors sell the Carolinas to the Crown
Description: 


Title: Natchez Massacre
Description: 


Title: North and South Carolina chartered as royal colonies
Description: 


Title: Benjamin Franklin purchases the <i>Pennsylvania Gazette</i>
Description: Benjamin Franklin and Hugh Meredith purchased Samuel Keimer's newspaper, the Pennsylvania Gazette. It quickly became the most successful newspaper in the colonies, reaching 2000 subscribers at its peak. Franklin frequently wrote articles for the Gazette anonymously, such as in 1752 when he published the results of his kite-flying experiment. The newspaper also published America's first political cartoon, the famous "Join, or Die" snake in 1754. The newspaper was discontinued in 1800, ten years after Franklin died.


Title: Chawasha Village Massacre
Description: 


Title: Colonial population is 629,445
Description: 


Title: First Great Awakening
Description: A resurgence of extreme religious enthusiasm, stretching from the 1730s to 1760s. It was a response to the declining religious enthusiasm in New England, and mainly appealed to the uneducated. Evangelicals, most prominently Jonathan Edwards and George Whitefield, delivered sermons convincing people to become more religious. Edwards, a Puritan minister from Massachusetts, described God as a wrathful deity who threatened to cast all of humanity into the depths of Hell, and the only way for people to save themselves would be to immediately plead forgiveness for all of their sins and accept Christ into their life. Similarly, Whitefield contradicted the Puritan notion that everyone was either saved or doomed from the moment of birth, instead arguing that God would show mercy if people would only repent of their sins. Preachers condemned those who seeked to use religion to turn a profit. causing people to start questioning religious authority. This challenging of authority would resurge in the 1760s and 1770s, when colonists began doubting the word of British political figures, instead trusting what they themselves believed. Some preachers slavery or even freed their slaves, declaring that blacks and whites were brothers. Some blacks and women began preaching, as well, making the movement important in racial and gender equality.


Title: Fort Fox Massacre
Description: 


Title: Cresap's War
Description: See "Maryland-Pennsylvania-Delaware border dispute"


Title: South Carolina fails to ban the importation of slaves
Description: 


Title: Maryland and Pennsylvania agree to new borders
Description: See "Maryland-Pennsylvania-Delaware border dispute"


Title: Province of Georgia founded
Description: The Province of Georgia (named after King George II of England) was charted to General James Oglethorpe, a wealthy Brit who desired to create a safe haven for those who had been imprisoned for debt. The British government also supported the creation of the colony because they wanted a buffer between South Carolina, one of the most lucrative continental British American colonies due to its rice cultivation, and Spanish Florida. However, once the colonists started arriving, they became discontented with the strict laws enforced by Oglethorpe. He banned both liquor and slavery, both of which the colonists desired. In an attempt to placate them, Oglethorpe granted the colonists the power of self-government, which they used to legalize slavery in 1751, along with establishing an elected assembly. Georgia would later go on to become a royal colony in 1752.


Title: Hat Act
Description: 


Title: Zenger libel trial
Description: John Peter Zenger was a journalist for the New-York Weekly Journal in New York City, NY. In 1733, Zenger criticized New York Governor William Cosby for meddling in the colony's Supreme Court in an attempt to control it. This angered Cosby, who had Zenger arrested for libel (slander). Zenger was defended by Andrew Hamilton and William Smith, who argued that if an accusation was true, it could not be libel. The jury determined Zenger to be not guilty after just ten minutes of deliberation. This was a huge win for the press, as well as the people, who had taken a passionate interest in the trial. The case set the groundwork for the freedom of the press, which would later become a dearly held value of the US.


Title: Molasses Act 1733
Description: A 6 pence per gallon tax on imports of molasses from non-English colonies. The tax was unpopular among the colonists and molasses was frequently smuggled to avoid paying it. It was later repealed and replaced by the Sugar Act, which cut the tax but was more strongly enforced.


Title: First Masonic Grand Lodge in the US
Description: 


Title: Mast tree riot in Exeter, New Hampshire
Description: 


Title: Riot against ship seizure in Hartford County, Connecticut
Description: 


Title: Georgia bans slavery
Description: 


Title: Anti-markethouse riot in Boston, Massachusetts
Description: 


Title: Anti-prostitution riot in Boston, Massachusetts
Description: 


Title: Anti-quitrent riot in North Carolina
Description: 


Title: Walking Purchase
Description: A land deal between Pennsylvania colonists and the Lenni Lenape Native Americans. The Lenape agreed to give up land bounded by the distance that a man could walk in 36 hours. Provincial secretary James Logan procured an incorrectly drawn map mislabeling two rivers. That way, it would appear that Logan's team of walkers could travel much farther than they actually did. Additionally, Logan hired the three fastest runners in the colony - Edward Marshall, Solomon Jennings, and James Yeates - to complete the circuit. Marshall made it seventy miles away, putting the total area captured at 1.2 million acres. Upset, the Lenape appealed to the Iroquois, who decided not to intervene.


Title: Fish dam riot in the Chuylkill River in Pennsylvania
Description: 


Title: George Whitefield arrives in America
Description: 


Title: George Whitefield's travels
Description: 


Title: Stono Rebellion
Description: The largest slave rebellion to take place in the British mainland colonies. It was led by literate slave Jemmy (aka Cato), who led a group of around 80 armed slaves to Spanish Florida, where the government promised freedom. They started off at the Stono River at the South Carolina Colony, where they attacked several whites before being subdued and captured by local militia groups. A group of rebels escaped and skirmished with militias again before their re-capture. Each rebel was then either executed or shipped to the West Indies.

Deaths:
25 whites
35-50 slaves


Title: War of Jenkins' Ear
Description: A war between Great Britain and Spain started so that the former could establish economic dominance. The war's name stemmed from an incident in 1731 in which British merchant Captain Robert Jenkins had his ear cut off by Spaniards. Hoping to keep their monopoly on the slave trade, as well as dominating Caribbean trade, Great Britain used the attack to justify a war that they hoped would remove Spanish presence from the New World.

The British declared war and launched an attack on Venezuela in the Battle of La Guaira, but were defeated. The British then captured the town of Portabelo, Panama, wrecking its forts and warehouses. The victory was celebrated wholeheartedly in Great Britain. In March through May 1740, British Vice Admiral Edward Vernon launched three attacks on the Spanish town of Cartagena de Indias, with the first two failing to do more than scout Spanish defenses. The third was the climax of the war, with the British launching a massive attack, composed of 186 ships bearing 27,000 troops. Vernon and his forces surrounded the city, but were impeded by Spanish trenches around the city's walls and were hit hard by Spanish forces led by Spanish Admiral Blas de Lezo. With yellow fever rampant in his troops, Vernon was forced to retreat to Jamaica, his forces suffering 6000 to Lezo's 1000.

Vernon continued on, destroying a fort in San Lorenzo el Real Chagres, attacking Guantanamo Bay in Cuba and Panama City. Meanwhile, British Georgians besieged St. Augustine, Florida, to no effect. Florida and Georgia proceeded to attack each other for a few years. Vernon attacked La Guaira again in 1743, but was repelled. This was the last major action of the war, as by 1742 most British force were diverted to Europe to fight the War of Austrian Succession. Both wars were resolved in 1848 with the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle.

Casualties:
20,000 British dead, wounded, missing, or captured
4500 Spanish dead
5000 Spanish wounded


Title: Battle of Cartagena de Indias
Description: this is supposedly when the colonists were first called Americans


Title: Colonial population is 905,563
Description: 


Title: James Oglethorpe fails to take St. Augustine, Florida
Description: 


Title: Plantation Act
Description: 


Title: South Carolina passes the Negro Act
Description: 


Title: 1741 New York conspiracy
Description: 


Title: "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God" speech
Description: A famous speech given by evangelical Jonathan Edwards in Enfield, CT. He conjured up frightful images of God, insisting that the Lord could at any moment cast anyone he wished into the depths of Hell. He claimed that 'the wicked' would suffer endlessly at the hands of Satan, and were already experiencing some of that Hell on Earth. The only way anyone could save themselves would be to openly accept Christ and recant all of their sins. This inspired many in the audience to immediately follow Edwards' advice and plead for forgiveness. The sermon was highly influential for converting people.


Title: Battle of Bloody Marsh
Description: 


Title: Battle of Gully Hole Creek
Description: 


Title: Election riot in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Description: 


Title: François and Louis-Joseph Gaultier de La Vérendrye claim South Dakota for France
Description: 


Title: American Philosophical Society founded
Description: 


Title: Benjamin Franklin invents the mail-order catalog
Description: 


Title: King George's War
Description: A war between two alliances of a European power and a Native American Confederacy: Great Britain and the Iroquois Confederacy, and France and the Wabanaki Confederacy. These were the same belligerents as in Queen Anne's War. In Europe, Great Britain had allied themselves with Austria in the War of Austrian Succession, thereby making themselves opponents of France and Prussia. The French attacked Canso (a British fishing port), and Annapolis Royal, the then-capital of Acadia. In August, the French-Wabanaki alliance attacked Fort Anne in Annapolis Royal, but were unable to penetrate its defenses. British colonists captured Fortress Louisbourg in a six-week siege in 1745. France attempted to recover the fort the next year, but was defeated by weather and disease. There was a lot of raiding, mostly by the French-Wabanaki alliance. The same alliance destroyed the town of Saratoga, NY, and forced the residents around the area to evacuate. The war ended in 1748 with the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, though the treaty did nothing to resolve hostilities between the nations.

Deaths:
8% of Massachusetts' adult male population
The rest is unknown (casualties were heavy)


Title: Massacre at Walden
Description: 


Title: New English capture of Louisbourg
Description: 


Title: Princeton University founded
Description: 


Title: Impressment riot in Boston, Massachusetts
Description: 


Title: Ohio Company founded
Description: 


Title: Chama River Massacre
Description: 


Title: Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle
Description: A treaty ending the War of Austrian Succession, King George's War, and the War of Jenkins' Ear. It mostly restored captured territories to their former owners, It renewed Great Britain's monopoly on the slave trade (though this was later traded away in 1750). France and Great Britain were upset that they had to relinquish the lands they took (the Austrian Netherlands and Louisbourg, respectively). Italy, however, became stable, while Spain got to retain control of all their colonies. Great Britain did not get the control over the New World they were hoping for.


Title: Father Junipero Serra arrives in North America
Description: 


Title: Father Le'Loutre's War
Description: 


Title: First Conestoga wagon
Description: 


Title: Georgia legalizes slavery
Description: 


Title: Ohio Company land grant
Description: The Ohio Company, a land speculating company, was granted half a million acres of the Ohio River Valley by the Virginian government. The company consisted of the richest and most powerful in Virginia, including the colony's royal governor, Robert Dinwiddie. This pressured other groups that had their eyes on the land, such as Native American groups, Pennsylvanian speculators, and the French. Great Britain's European rival stepped up their control over the Ohio River Valley, creating tensions between the two countries, which would soon erupt into the French and Indian War.


Title: Colonial population exceeds 1 million
Description: Colonial population is 1,170,760


Title: Election riot in York, Pennsylvania
Description: 


Title: Thomas Walker passes through the Cumberland Gap
Description: 


Title: Iron Act
Description: 


Title: Benjamin Franklin's kite experiment
Description: 


Title: Pennsylvania Hospital becomes the first hospital to be opened in America
Description: 


Title: British Empire adopts the Gregorian calendar
Description: 


Title: El Presido Real San Ignacio de Tubac established in Sonora y Sinaloa
Description: 


Title: Province of Georgia chartered as a royal colony
Description: 


Title: Attack at Mocodome
Description: 


Title: Riot against the surveyor of the woods in Exeter, New Hampshire
Description: 


Title: Fort Dusquesne built
Description: 


Title: <b>French and Indian War</b>
Description: 


Title: Battle of Jumonville Glen
Description: The first conflict of the French and Indian War. Lieutenant Colonel George Washington and Mingo Chief Tanacharison led a band of 40 Virginian militia and 15 Mingo warriors to a scouting party of 35 French Canadiens, planning to attack them. The party was led by French officer Joseph Coulon de Villiers de Jumonville, who were patrolling the area to see if Washington would enter French territory. When the two groups found each other,they battled for about 15 minutes. Tanacharison split Jumonville's head open with a tomahawk, with the defeat of the rest of the Canadiens soon after. Washington and his men then constructed Fort Necessity nearby.

Casualties:
1 Virginian killed
2-3 Virginians wounded
Most Canadiens captured or killed


Title: Albany Conference
Description: The Albany Conference, or Albany Congress, was a meeting of delegates from several Northern British colonies in Albany, NY to discuss plans of union for the purposes of defense against the French and Indians. All of New England (Rhode Island, Connecticut, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire) attended, as well as the Middle Colonies of Pennsylvania and New York. Invitations were sent to the other colonies, but they declined to attend, claiming the threat of the French was a Northern issue and did not concern them. The conference attempted to enforce the alliance with the Iroquois Confederacy, which had been faltering since the outbreak of the French and Indian War several months prior to the conference, but the 150 tribal representatives withdrew from the meeting early on without agreement to help the British.

Nevertheless, the conference continued, deliberating over regulations of Indian affairs and westward migration. What was not planned was what soon became the main topic of discussion. Pennsylvania delegate Benjamin Franklin introduced his Plan of Union, a confederation of the British North American colonies. It was to be a government composed of a royally appointed President General and a Grand Council of delegates nominated by the lower houses of the colonial legislatures. Each colony would elect between two and seven delegates proportional to population, though each colony would only get one vote in every matter. The confederation would have some authority to levy taxes, make treaties, and raise an army for the common defense of the colonies. In order to communicate the danger posed by France, Franklin drew his now-famous "Join, or Die" snake cartoon.

The plan was approved by the delegates, but had to be agreed upon by the Crown and colonial assemblies, both of whom rejected it. The British government was cautious of giving further power to the colonies, who in their eyes, had already been given considerable self-determination. The colonial assemblies opposed the plan because in their eyes, the British government already controlled them to a considerable degree, and did not want to give up further power to another government. The plan was further unpopular among the colonists, who felt that both the colonial and British governments interfered with their daily affairs too much, and did not want to be further micromanaged by a third level of government. Though Franklin’s plan failed, it was significant in that it was the first proposal to unite the Thirteen Colonies, and provided inspiration for the Articles of Confederation over 20 years later.


Title: Battle of Fort Necessity
Description: The first large-scale conflict of the French and Indian War, fought between around 300 South Carolinian and Virginian regulars and officers led by Lt. Colonel George Washington and Captain James Mackay and 600 French regulars and Canadien militia and 100 Native American warriors led by Louis Coulon de Villiers.

After the battle of Jumonville Glen, Washington, Tanacharison and their men constructed Fort Necessity at Great Meadows in Pennsylvania, finishing by June 3. Coulon, seeking vengeance for the death of his brother at the Jumonville Glen, found the fort the next month. Coulon's men charged at Washington's line, at which the Virginians promptly ran back into the fort. Unable to inflict meaningful casualties on the French, who had taken cover in the woods nearby, Washington agreed to Coulon's terms of surrender, abandoning the fort.

Casualties;
31 British colonists killed
70 British colonists wounded
3 French/Canadiens/Native Americans killed
19 French/Canadiens/Native Americans wounded


Title: King's College founded
Description: 


Title: Braddock Expedition
Description: 


Title: Draper's Meadow Massacre
Description: 


Title: Battle of Braddock's Field
Description: A conflict in the French and Indian War between 1300 British troops led by Major General Edward Braddock and an alliance of 108 French troops, 146 French militiamen, and 637 Native American warriors led by Captain Daniel Liénard de Beaujeu. Beaujeu was killed quickly in the engagement, but the rest of the men continued fighting. The warriors used psychological warfare against the British, shrieking while fighting them and nailing the dead's scalps to trees. The British units soon fell into disarray, but Braddock refused to retreat. After about three hours of fighting, he was fatally wounded, spurring the British to retreat.

Casualties:
457 British killed
450+ British wounded
27 French/Canadiens/Native Americans killed
57 French/Canadiens/Native Americans wounded


Title: Expulsion of the Acadians
Description: 


Title: Battle of Lake George
Description: 


Title: Penn's Creek Massacre
Description: 


Title: Great Cove Massacre
Description: 


Title: Moravian Church Massacre
Description: 


Title: Riot against the recruitment of troops in Brentwood, New Hampshire
Description: 


Title: Rule of 1756
Description: 


Title: Battle of Fort Bull
Description: 


Title: Seizure of longboat of HMS <i>Enterprise</i> by mob in Portsmouth, New Hampshire
Description: 


Title: First Battle on Snowshoes
Description: 


Title: Battle of Sabbath Day Point
Description: 


Title: Siege of Fort William Henry
Description: A siege by an alliance of 6200 French soldiers and Canadien militiamen and 1800 Native American warriors led by General Louis-Joseph de Montcalm. They attacked British Fort William Henry, which protected 2500 troops led by Lieutenant Colonel George Monro. On August 3, French and Indian forces surrounded the fort, and began firing their cannons on the 5th. Two days later, the French had breached the fort's defenses, leading Monro to surrender on the 9th. They agreed that the British would surrender their ammunition and be returned to another fort after they made several concessions However, that night a group of Abenaki assaulted the defenseless British, killing somewhere between 70 and 180 troops.

Casualties:
Few French/Canadiens/Native Americans
200-380 Brits killed
2000+ Brits captured


Title: Attack on German Flatts
Description: 


Title: Anglo-Cherokee War
Description: 


Title: First black Baptist church founded
Description: 


Title: Second Battle on Snowshoes
Description: 


Title: San Saba Mission Massacre
Description: 


Title: Conquest of New France
Description: 


Title: Siege of Louisbourg
Description: A nearly two-month siege of the French-controlled Fortress of Louisbourg by the British. After a few weeks of bad weather, Major General James Wolfe captured Lighthouse Point near Louisbourg on June 12. The British artillery then began bombarding the fort. On July 23, a cannonball set fire to the King's Bastion, the largest building in North America and the headquarters of the fort, damaging French morale. Three days later, British Admiral Edward Boscawen sent in a naval force that disabled the last of the French ships. The French surrendered and were forced to give up their arms and flags. The position of the fort allowed the British to more easily attack Quebec.

Casualties:
172 British troops killed
355 British troops wounded
102 French troops killed
303 French troops wounded
6,600 French troops surrendered


Title: Battle of Carillon
Description: A battle of the French and Indian War between the British and French, both of whom had colonist militia, troops, and Native American warriors on each side. The British, led by General James Abercrombie, had forces far superior to the French, sporting 12,000 men to General Marquis de Montcalm's 3600. Despite this, Abercrombie made several key misjudgments that led to a French victory. Specifically, he decided to attempt a direct assault on the strategically located French Fort Carillon with no artillery, despite their enemies being well entrenched. When this failed, he tried the charge several more times. Montcalm rallied his men, trying to keep their spirit up in the face of superior numbers. After extensive casualties, Abercrombie gave up and retreated. It was the deadliest conflict in the French and Indian War.

Casualties:
100 French/Canadiens/Native Americans killed
500 French/Canadiens/Native Americans wounded
150 French/Canadiens/Native Americans captured
1000 Brits/Native Americans killed
1500 Brits/Native Americans wounded
100 Brits/Native Americans missing


Title: Battle of Fort Frontenac
Description: A battle in the French and Indian War in which British Lieutenant Colonel John Bradstreet led a force of 2500 militiamen to capture Fort Frontenac, an important French trade center. After about two days of bombardments, the French surrendered, allowing the British to intercept or destroy French supplies.

Casualties:
11 British troops wounded
2 French killed


Title: Battle of Fort Duquesne
Description: A battle in the French and Indian War in which 750 British men led by Major James Grant attacked French Fort Duquesne in modern-day Pittsburgh, PA. Grant attempted a diversion and ambush strategy, but both parties were caught by French and Indian men. The Indians were well-adapted to fighting in the forest, using the trees as cover from British bullets. Grant and Major Andrew Lewis were both captured, leading the rest of the British to retreat. However, the French knew that a much larger attack was coming, so they reMained in the fort until November 26, when they burned it down.

Casualties:
104 British killed
220 British wounded
18 British captured
8 French/Native Americans killed
8 French/Native Americans wounded


Title: Anti-land tax riot in North Carolina
Description: 


Title: New England planters immigrate to Acadia
Description: 


Title: Battle of Fort Niagara
Description: A battle in the French and Indian War in which 3500 British and Iroquois led by Brigadier General John Prideaux and Chief Sayenqueraghta attacked the French Fort Niagara in New York. The British and Iroquois besieged the fort for 20 days, which was defended by French Captain Pierre Pouchot. Prideaux was killed during the battle, but the French surrendered on July 26 after their reinforcements were defeated.

Casualties:
109 French/Canadiens/Native Americans killed or wounded
377 French/Canadiens/Native Americans captured
239 British/Iroquois killed or wounded


Title: Battle of La Belle-Famille
Description: 


Title: Battle of Fort Ticonderoga
Description: 


Title: Battle of Ticonderoga
Description: A battle in the French and Indian War in which over 11,000 Brits led by General Sir Jeffery Amherst attacked Fort Ticonderoga (called Fort Carillon by the French) defended by a garrison of 400 led by Brigadier General François-Charles de Bourlamaque. The French had rerouted outer defenses of the fort elsewhere, allowing for an easy capture by the British. The French bombarded the British for two days, then abandoned the fort. de Bourlamaque tried to blow up the fort as well, but only destroyed its powder magazine. Amherst captured Fort Ticonderoga, which was strategically located in the Ohio River Valley. They would hold onto the fort until it was captured by Vermont revolutionary forces in 1775.

Casualties:
5 Brits killed
31 Brits wounded
40 French captured


Title: Battle of Beauport
Description: 


Title: Battle of Quebec
Description: A battle in the French and Indian War in which over 4000 British soldiers led by General James Wolfe fought with around 2500 French soldiers, Canadien militia, and Native Americans led by General Montcalm for control of Quebec City. It started when the British scaled the cliffs by the city, and were met by the French on the Plains of Abraham, named after a farmer that owned the land. In less than an hour, the battle was over, with the British victorious. Both Montcalm and Wolfe had been mortally wounded in the fight. The French abandoned Quebec City, putting the British in a good position to attack the rest of French Canada.

Casualties:
58 British troops killed
600 British troops wounded
116 French/Canadiens/Native Americans killed
600-1200 French/Canadiens/Native Americans wounded


Title: Quebec captured
Description: The Articles of Capitulation of Quebec were signed, giving the British Army control over the city. This removed a large amount of French power from Canada, allowing the British to more easily continue their assault on the colony, including in Montreal.


Title: St. Francis Raid
Description: 


Title: Colonial population exceeds 1.5 million
Description: Colonial population is 1,593,625


Title: Fire destroys much of Boston
Description: 


Title: Battle of Sainte-Foy
Description: 


Title: Siege of Quebec
Description: 


Title: Battle of Point-aux-Trembles
Description: 


Title: Sainte-Thérèse Raid
Description: 


Title: Montreal Campaign
Description: 


Title: Battle of the Thousand Islands
Description: 


Title: Montreal captured
Description: The Governor General of New France, Pierre François de Rigaud, Marquis de Vaudreuil-Cavagnal signed the Articles of Capitulation of Montreal, granting the British Army, led by Major-General Jeffery Amherst control over the city. This effectively removed French control over Canada, bringing an end to the battles of the French and Indian War.


Title: Accession of King George III of England
Description: 


Title: Reign of King George III
Description: Though he remained the King of Great Britain until 1820, he relinquished control over the newly recognized United States in 1783.


Title: Writs of Assistance
Description: Paxton case - 11/16/1761
Malcolm case - 9/24/1766


Title: Bute Ministry
Description: 


Title: Treaty of Paris (1763)
Description: The 1763 Treaty of Paris was an agreement between Great Britain, Portugal, Spain, and France that ended the Seven Years' War and the French and Indian War. France ceded nearly all of its land in North America to Great Britain. This included Canada and the eastern half of French Louisiana, the latter being the region east of the Mississippi River and west of the Appalachian Mountains. For their part, Spain gave up East Florida to Great Britain. France also gave up control of Dominica, Grenada, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Tobago, all lucrative sugar islands, to Great Britain. In return, France reMained in control of western Louisiana and the island of Guadeloupe. This sugar colony produced 6 million pounds a year, while Canada made comparatively less and was more expensive to maintain, so France saw this as a favorable loss. Voltaire once quipped that Canada was nothing more than "a few acres of snow." The French Canadians, on the other hand, were outraged at the French concession and their home country's indifferent attitude towards their plight.

The French Canadians were Catholic, which the British were apprehensive about governing. However, they moreso feared aggravating tensions with France by deporting or forcibly converting the Canadians, as well as the possibility that those deported would escape to and strengthen other French American colonies, so for the time being the British left them be. France was of course upset at their loss, but saw the treaty as quite favorable due to their retention of their Caribbean sugar islands and the loss of the expensive Canada. They hoped that the Americans would rebel against the British, a wish that would come true 25 years later.

The treaty also stipulated that Great Britain was to allow Catholicism to be freely practiced in Canada, and grant free emigration from Canada for 18 months, though only 270 French Canadians ended up leaving in that time. The treaty specified different treatment of Quebec from the rest of Canada, which was the beginning of that region's semi-independent culture and government that persists to this day.

This treaty put Great Britain in control of much of North America, and the end of French influence in the region. Canada and the region east of the Mississippi would continue to be dominated by British law, culture, and people. The end of the war also solidified Great Britain's status as the most powerful nation in Europe, though their newly acquired severe debt somewhat tempered their victory. As a more immediate consequence, Americans from the Thirteen colonies began moving west of the Appalachian Mountains to explore and settle in the newly acquired lands, which brought them into conflict with the Indian tribes in the region.


Title: Grenville Ministry
Description: 


Title: <b>Pontiac's Rebellion</b>
Description: Pontiac's Rebellion was a war between British colonists and troops and a confederacy of American Indian tribes led by the Odawa chief Pontiac around the eastern Great Lakes region.

The war immediately followed and was directly caused by the end of the French and Indian War. Great Britain defeated France and gained recognition of nearly all of the eastern portion of North America, and prepared to settle colonists in the new region. Most of the Indians living there had preferred the relatively positive relationships they shared with the French, and were upset to learn that they would only be seeing the British, who tended to treat them significantly worse. Not only did colonists come in droves, but the military followed, intending to secure a newly won region but tensing the situation further. General Jeffrey Amherst, the British commander-in-chief in North America, further deteriorated their relationship in February 1761 by ending the policy of gift-giving. The Indians had seen the many gifts given by the French as fair payment for use of what they considered their land, but Amherst saw this as unnecessary bribery, and was pressured by Great Britain's lack of finances to end such an expensive policy. Amherst also limited the amount of gunpowder traders could sell to Indians. Several years prior the Cherokee had fought against the British, but gave up due to a lack of gunpowder, and Amherst hoped that limiting the resource would discourage any future uprisings. The Indians objected, claiming that gunpowder was necessary for food to eat and fur to trade.

This tension erupted on April 28, 1763, when Odawa chief Pontiac convinced several hundred Indians from various tribes to attack the British-controlled Fort Detroit near where there would later be a city of the same name. Pontiac besieged the fort for several months, defeating a surprise attack by British reinforcements at the Battle of Bloody Run on July 31. Meanwhile, Indians elsewhere attacked other British forts in the region, successfully capturing eight: Forts Sandusky, St. Joseph, Miami, Ouiatenonin, Michilimackinac, Venango, Le Boeuf, and Presque, the last falling on June 21. The British garrisons were often lured out of the forts under false pretenses before being killed.

Fearing for their safety, settlers in western Pennsylvania sought refuge in Fort Pitt, which Pontiac's confederacy advanced on and besieged. Becoming increasingly desperate, the officers in Fort Pitt gave to the besieging Delaware Indians blankets previously used by people infected with smallpox in hopes of the disease spreading among their attackers. It is unsure how effective this strategy was, but in terms of the total number of Indian deaths from smallpox it was a small factor.

Colonel Henry Bouquet was dispatched with 500 troops to assist Fort Pitt. On August 1, most of the besieging Indians left the fort and marched to meet his force. They fought on August 5 at the Battle of Bushy Run, where Bouquet narrowly defeated the force, and on August 20 rescued Fort Pitt. This victory would not last long, as on September 14 several hundred Indians attacked a supply train near Fort Niagara, killing more than 70, which the British dubbed the Devil's Hole Massacre.

The early success of Pontiac's confederacy prompted a group of western Pennsylvanians to form a vigilante group called the Paxton Boys to attack Indians living in the region. On December 14, the Paxton Boys killed six Susquehannocks living peacefully in the village of Conestoga, and another 14 that were placed in protective custody in Lancaster. In January the next year, several hundred Paxton Boys marched on Philadelphia, but were eventually dispersed by the presence of British troops, local militia, and negotiations with Benjamin Franklin.

Indian raids on British villages continued well into 1764. Amherst, deemed responsible for the rebellion, was recalled and replaced with Major General Thomas Gage, who ordered two punitive expeditions, one by Bouquet and the other by Colonel John Bradstreet. Meanwhile, Sir William Johnson, British superintendant of the Indian Department, negotiated a treaty at Fort Niagara. Bradstreet did the same at Fort Detroit, against his superior's wishes. By the time Bouquet arrived at the villages he was targeting most of their inhabitants were ready to make peace.

While the war was mostly over by this point, Great Britain had resolved to make peace with all the Indians in the region. Gage sent Pontiac a wampum belt, an essential tool in peace talks with the Indians from that region. Pontiac himself had lessened his aggression after hearing of the treaties the British had made. A final treaty with Pontiac was formalized on July 25, 1766, as a kind of stalemate, the British not being able to conquer the land, but the Indians not being able to drive out the British.

Pontiac's Rebellion marked a sharp decline in British-Indian relations, with both sides in the war determined to drive the other out completely. Convinced that Brits and Indians could not live side-by-side, and fearing that defending colonists from Indian attacks like Pontiac's would be too expensive for an empire in deep financial straits, King George III issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763, declaring that all land west of the Appalachian Mountains would be Indian territory, and the colonists were not to settle there. The war also demonstrated the success Indians could see when forming a confederacy. Indians would fight many a war with colonists in the future, and they would see the greatest success when forming a confederacy like Pontiac's.

Casualties:
~450 British troops killed
2000 British colonists killed/captured
Unknown Native American casualties (likely around 400)


Title: Siege of Fort Detroit
Description: The SIege of Fort Detroit was the opening conflict in Pontiac's Rebellion. On May 7, Pontiac and a force of 300 men approached the fort, having captured and killed a small British surveying party the day before. Pontiac's plan was to be invited into the fort under the pretense of diplomacy and take the fort by surprise with concealed weapons. However, Henry Gladwin, the British commander in charge of Fort Detroit, was apparently already aware of this plan, and refused to let the Confederates in. Pontiac tried once again to trick Gladwin into letting his men in two days later, but this, too, failed. Instead, Pontiac laid siege to the fort, as well as killing a number of British settlers in the area, one of which was ritually cannabalized. Shortly after the siege started, Pontiac requested a peace talk with two British officers at a neutral location, whom he immediately took hostage.


Title: Siege of Fort Pitt
Description: An infamous battle of Pontiac's Rebellion. Delaware Native American warriors had surrounded Fort Pitt, demanding that they receive the land that had been stolen from them. The colonists refused, claiming that it was now their home. In response, the Delaware laid siege to the fort. Commander-in-Chief, North America Jeffery Amherst was infuriated by this turn of events, who had previously not thought of the Native Americans to be any threat. He sent a large force to defend the fort, but were intercepted by more Native American warriors and defeated. Running out of options and becoming ever angrier, Amherst demanded the colonists use any means necessary to "Extirpate this Execrable Race," including the intentional infection of smallpox. Though the concept of germs had not been developed yet, they understood that people could become infected by the same disease if they came into contact with something a previous victim had touched. Thus, on June 24 the colonists 'gifted' the Delaware with two blankets received from a smallpox hospital. They had the desired effect; the disease quickly spread not only throughout the Delaware, but to nearby Shawnee villages as well. Despite the fact that Native American populations was fairly spread out over the continent, smallpox was infectious enough to have a large impact. Historians suspect this intentional infection occurred more frequently, but were not documented because of the seriousness of the act.


Title: Smallpox blankets
Description: 


Title: Battle of Bloody Run
Description: 


Title: Battle of Bushy Run
Description: 


Title: Devil's Hole Massacre
Description: 


Title: Royal Proclamation of 1763
Description: The Royal Proclamation of 1763 was a declaration by King George III of Great Britain that designated British land west of the Appalachian Mountains as Indian territory, and that colonists were not to settle there. It also forbade the sale of Native American land to individuals. The proclamation was prompted by the outbreak of Pontiac's Rebellion, which threatened the safety of colonists on the frontier. Great Britain, being under a tight budget due to the financial strains the Seven Years' War placed on the empire, could not afford to station large numbers of troops on the frontier to protect the colonists from attacks like Pontiac's.

This had the opposite effect of the king's intentions; colonists were furious that they had spent nine years fighting and dying to drive the French off the continent, only to be barred from claiming the land they had just won. The line was ignored, with colonists continuing to settle west, which heightened tensions with Indians as expected. This marked the beginning in what would become a long string of defiances by the colonists against British orders.


Title: Parson's Cause
Description: In the 1750s, a drought struck Virginia, leading to an increase in tobacco prices. The price of tobacco before the droubt had been two pence per pound, and debts were often expressed in terms of pounds of tobacco. To relieve the stress placed on farmers, the House of Burgesses passed the Two Penny Act in 1758, which temporarily allowed debts measured in tobacco to be paid off at a rate of two pence per pound. A group of clergymen who held were owed debts to be paid in tobacco petitioned the London Board of Trade to repeal the law, which they did. The clergymen then sued their debtors so that they could be paid in tobacco as initially promised, a case called Parson's Cause. Patrick Henry was practicing law at the time, and was invited onto a counsel to argue in court. Henry declared the Two Penny Act veto violated Virginians' constitutional rights, and called any king who annulled good laws such as that a "tyrant" who "forfeits all right to his subjects' obedience." Someone in the crowd accused Henry of treason, but he ignored it. Though not a pivotal moment in colonial history, this was an early example of hostile language used against King George III that would in years to come become commonplace.


Title: Paxton Boys
Description: 


Title: <i>The Rights of Colonies Examined</i>
Description: The Rights of Colonies Examined was an essay written by Rhode Island governor Stephen Hopkins. In it, he argues that the British Constitution, "the best that ever existed among men," allowed British subjects to be governed only by laws they have consented to in some manner, and prevented forcing their property away from them. The Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode Island charters granted those colonists all the same rights that any British subject was entitled to, a trait shared with every country and its colonies. Ancient Greece and ancient Rome followed this principle, and even contemporary Spain and France, whose subjects Hopkins claims are less free than their British counterparts. Parliament had also passed, with King George II's accession, a law that declared foreign Protestants who had lived in a British colony for seven years to be eligible for naturalization into a fully-fledged British subject. Therefore, colonists were undoubtedly entitled to the rights of British subjects.

Great Britain had always respected these rights as long as the colonists had reMained loyal. But now, though the colonists were no less loyal than before, Parliament, for an unknown reason, had pased the Sugar Act, "limiting, restricting, and burdening the trade of these colonies much more than had ever been done before, as also for greatly enlarging the power and jurisdiction of the courts of admiralty." They had also passed a resolution considering placing a tax on stamps, another worrying prospect.

Hopkins concedes that it is necessary for Parliament to control the empire's general commerce, but argues that when these laws are being determined, the colonies "ought to have such notice, that they May appear and be heard by their agents, by counsel, or written representation." Parliament is too far away to know much about what is happening in the colonies, so it is only with this notice that Parliament could be made aware of how negatively this would affect the colonies. "A duty of three pence per gallon on foreign molasses is well known to every man in the least acquainted with it to be much higher than that article can possibly bear, and therefore must operate as an absolute prohibition. This will put a total stop to our exportation of lumber, horses, flour, and fish to the French and Dutch sugar colonies." Entire industries in the colonies would collapse and perhaps be taken over by the French. Rhode Island, "a new colony" which relies heavily on this kind of trade, would suffer more than anyone. The colonies' economic hardships would make Britain suffer in turn. This same act of Parliament banned exporting lumber and timber to anywhere besides Britain, which would damage the Irish linen industry, an injury that would provide Britain with no benefit.

Hopkins also laments the strengthening of admiralty courts. Before, these courts were empowered only "within moderate territorial jurisdictions," but now a colonist in Georgia could have his property seized and be forced to sail all the way up to Halifax, 1500 miles away, to try to win it back in court. There, the judge could easily be convinced that the seizure had probable cause, and the Georgian could not sue the seizor. "Surely if the colonies had been fully heard before this had been done, the liberties and properties of the Americans would not have been so much disregarded."

The stamp duty resolution was even more worrying. "For it must be confessed by all men that they who are taxed at pleasure by others cannot possibly have any property, can have nothing to be called their own. They who have no property can have no freedom, but are indeed reduced to the most abject slavery." If this tax were to go through, the British would soon realize that they could simply offload more of their tax burdens onto the Americans, who could do nothing about it. Raising taxes on the colonists would soon become politically popular. Though this money would go to future defense, but "will not at all alleviate the hardship, but serves only more strongly to mark the servile state of the people. Free people have thought, and will always think, that the money necessary for their defense lies safest in their own hands." This sentiment has been shared by "the best and wisest kings and governors of mankind, in every age of the world," like Emperor Constantine of Rome.

Hopkins then asks what right Parliament has to tax them. "And can it possibly be shewn [sic] that the people in Britain have a sovereign authority over their fellow subjects in America?... Before a thing can be justly given away, the giver must certainly have acquired a property in it; and have the people in Britain justly acquired such a property in the goods and estates of the people in these colonies that they May give them away at pleasure?" After all, the colonists had not given their consent to these taxes.

Hopkins then argues that in an empire like Great Britain, with so many levels of government, "no single part, though greater than another part, is by that superiority entitled to make laws for or to tax such lesser part; but all laws and all taxations which bind the whole must be made by the whole." He uses the contemporary example of the "empire of Germany" (presumably the Holy Roman Empire), where neither the emperor nor the strong states govern or tax the weaker states. Only the diet, with representatives of each state, could do so. In the same way, the people of Britain do not hold sovereignty over the people of America, so have no right to tax them. Only if they receive consent in the form of Parliamentary representation of the colonists could they justly do this.

Hopkins then discusses the argument that the colonies ought to help pay for the war that helped defend them. He notes a lack of precedent. During King George's War of the 1740s, the colonists successfully defended themselves against a large French attack with no help from Britain. They did not get to keep this land; it was under British control, and would become new colonies. Hopkins predicts that "hard will be the fate, yea cruel the destiny, of these unhappy colonies if the reward they are to receive for all this is the loss of their freedom; better for them Canada still reMained French."

He then asserts that the colonies are still contributing their fair share to the British Empire, even without taxes. They pay for their own local governments, just like the British do. They "cheerfully" raise money for the public good when called upon, being the most "loyal and dutiful subjects as any age or nation ever produced." Why would Parliament want to jeopordize that with "an incidious [sic] and unconstitutional method to compel them to do what they have ever done freely."

He closes with the reminder that the colonists have always been loyal, faithful, Christian subjects, who "have honestly obeyed every royal command and cheerfully submitted to every constitutional law," would risk their lives if ordered, and have generally tried their utmost to maintain good relations with the mother country.

The essay was widely circulated across the colonies. It cemented Hopkins as a central Patriot and statesman for Rhode Island.

Full text: https://teachingAmericanhistory.org/document/the-rights-of-the-colonies-examined/


Title: Sugar Act
Description: The Sugar Act was a tax levied by Parliament on the colonies that replaced the Molasses Act of 1733. It lowered the tax on imported molasses to North America from six pence to three, but in return strengthened the tax's enforcement. Previous taxes, such as the Navigation Acts, had been frequently ignored by the colonists, who engaged in smuggling to avoid having to pay more. Great Britain was initially able to afford the loss, as the colonies generated enough profit to be lenient on tax collecting. However, after the Seven Years' War, Great Britain had resolved to station ten thousand troops in the colonies for their protection against the French and Indians, and the colonists were expected to contribute to the troops' payment. The Sugar Act seeked to put an end to tax evasion via smuggling by strengthening the admiralty courts that charged smugglers by removing the right of the accused to a trial by jury. The tax hit New England ports hard, even more so as it came at a time of economic depression. Samuel Adams and James Otis of Massachusetts were among the strongest objectors to the tax, complaining that it violated their right to tax themselves as outlined in their colonial charter. A group of fifty Boston merchants committed to stop purchasing British luxury imports, and in New York City colonial production of goods increased. Aside from this, objection to the Sugar Act was relatively muted outside port cities like Boston, as it mainly affected merchants. It was the first in a line of taxes levied by the British government that produced tension between the colonies and the homeland.


Title: Enoch Brown School Massacre
Description: 


Title: Currency Act
Description: The Currency Act of 1764 was a law passed by Parliament that prohibited residents of all thirteen colonies from using paper money to pay off any public or private debt. Parliament passed the law because they found regulating printed colonial currency difficult, preferring specie (gold or silver) to be used like back in England. Printed currency was subject to rampant inflation, especially in New England. A particularly bad example was Rhode Island, whose currency in 1740 was worth a mere four percent of its face value. Unfortunately, specie was in short supply in the colonies, and the Currency Act made it even more difficult to pay their debts. Colonists, including Benjamin Franklin, who was in London at the time, would petition Parliament for the next nine years to repeal or amend the law. It was seen as a "major grievance" and many felt as if Great Britain did not understand their struggles. They also didn't appreciate Great Britain limiting their autonomy, something they had been promised and grown used to the the last century.

In 1770, the New York legislature informed Parliament that the Currency Act was preventing them from paying for the (also unpopular) Quartering Act, which required the colonies to pay for the presence of British soldiers there. Great Britain, fearing taking on such an expensive duty themselves when they were in deep financial straits, gave in and allowed £120,000 in paper currency to be printed to pay for the soldiers. In 1773 Parliament amended the Currency Act to allow paper currency to be used for public debts, which considerably eased tensions. Nevertheless, it was an early sign for many that Great Britain did not truly understand the colonists and that their local legislatures were better suited to governing them.


Title: College of Rhode Island founded
Description: The College of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations was founded in the eponymous colony. It is the seventh-oldest college in America, and continues to this day under the name of Brown University.


Title: Pope Day riot in Boston
Description: Pope Day was an anti-Catholic holiday annually celebrated in the thirteen colonies, especially in New England. It was typically celebrated by the lower class, including sailors, laborers, apprentices, servants, and even black slaves, and was an occasion for drinking and rioting. It was most popular in Boston due to its large number of sailors. Effigies of the pope and the Devil were paraded around and burned, and the elites were insulted. The Pope Day riot in 1764 was particularly heated, as a carriage bearing one such effigy ran over a boy, killing him. Pope Day began to decline in popularity after the passage of the Stamp Act. The response to the tax united the lower, middle, and upper classes, lessening the hostility between classes expressed in Pope Day.


Title: <b>Stamp Act Crisis</b>
Description: The Stamp Act Crisis was a period of unrest in the British American colonies, particularly in Boston, Massachusetts, over the 1765 Stamp Act, a direct tax on paper. Great Britain was in sore need of money, as it had driven itself deeply in debt fighting the Seven Years' War. Parliament decided that a good source of that money would be the American colonies, as some of that money the mother country had spent had gone to protecting them from the French and Indians. The situation was excacerbated by the outbreak of Pontiac's Rebellion, which further threatened the safety of the colonists, demanding more expenses for soldiers stationed in the colonies. The Stamp Act marked the first time Great Britain directly taxed goods on its colonies rather than regulating trade. The law required that any good made from paper made in the colonies, including books, commercial papers, court documents, land deeds, newspapers, wills, etc., had to carry a stamp that would be purchased from British authorities. Unlike the Sugar Act, which mostly only affected ports, the Stamp Act affected nearly every colonist, rich or poor, but especially hurting those whose business relied on paper. This, combined with the tax's directness, was what resulted in the much larger outrage over the tax than there had been over the Sugar Act.

The main issue around the tax was the idea of "taxation without representation." Colonists could not vote in parliamentary elections, and so had no direct representation. The British Constitution guaranteed that subjects could not be taxed without their consent, which took the form of parliamentary representation. Opponents of the tax argued that this meant the tax was unconstitutional and violated their rights. Proponents of the tax countered by pointing out that three fourths of British subjects, even on the island, could not vote in parliamentary elections, either. Proponents agreed that nonconsensual taxation violated the rights of the colonists, but argued that the colonists had "virtual representation," as it was the job of Parliament to represent the interests of all British subjects.

This was insufficient logic for the colonists, who began protesting for "no taxation without representation." Samuel Adams of Boston, who would become the tax's most virulent opponent, wrote that it violated the colonies' right to manage their own taxes, as outlined in their charters. The opposition to the tax was shared across the thirteen colonies. Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, and Virginia had already sent protests to Parliament over the Sugar Act, and by the end of 1765 every colony except North Carolina and Georgia had sent one over the Stamp Act. The Virginia House of Burgesses published a series of resolutions formally documenting their disapproval of the tax. Nine of the thirteen colonies sent delegates to the Stamp Act Congress, to coordinate a proper response to the tax. They wrote the Declaration of Rights and Grievances, formally outlining the popular colonial position on the Stamp Act, to be sent to Parliament and the king.

Protests broke out in the streets, the largest of which came from Boston. Ebenezer MacIntosh, a local cobbler, hanged an effigy of Andrew Oliver, a local stamp distributor. He gathered a mob and together they paraded the effigy through the city, destroying Oliver's office, then beheading and burning his effigy. They then destroyed Oliver's house, and threw stones at Lieutenant Governor Thomas Hutchinson and Sheriff Stephen Greenleaf when they attempted to stop the mob. MacIntosh paraded Oliver himself through the streets and forced him to publicly resign. On August 26, MacIntosh decided to attack Hutchinson himself, as he did not know the lieutenant governor privately opposed the Stamp Act. MacIntosh gathered another mob and raided Hutchinson's mansion, evicting him and his family and destroying most of his possessions, including his documentation of much of Massachusetts' early history. Deputy Register of the Vice-Admiralty William Story and Comptroller of Customs Benjamin Hollowell were subjected to similar attacks.

Groups resisting the Stamp Act broke out across the colonies, calling themselves the Sons of Liberty. These groups allowed people to bypass the stamps, forced Stamp Act collectors to resign, and burned effigies of royal officials. The Sons of Liberty comprised mostly of the middle and upper class, but performed large public demonstrations to win the approval of the common man as well. The Sons of Liberty in each colony created committees of correspondence to coordinate with groups in other colonies. Connections were made between New York and Connecticut, New York and Massachusetts, New York and Rhode Island, Rhode Island and New Hampshire, and Rhode Island and Connecticut. The Sons of Liberty also formed in New Jersey, Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina. Importantly, merchants began boycotting British goods, and refusing to sell their own goods to the homeland. They hoped that Parliament would back down if their economy suffered from the tax, instead of benefiting. Though rebels, the Sons of Liberty maintained loyalty to the Crown, and would not have dreamed of full independence.

One of the would-be hardest-hit indstries were the newspapers, as of course they relied heavily on paper. They also of course had an excellent outlet for voicing their frustrations, of which they made good use. They reported effigy hangings and resignation speeches, and decried the tax as tyrannical and despotic. William Bradford, a prominent Philadelphia printer and influential figure in the Sons of Liberty, adorned his newspaper, the Pennsylvania Journal, with a skull and crossbones, labeled "the fatal Stamp." When the tax went into effect, some newspapers placed images of tombstones and skeletons on their issues, representing the death of their industry. There were a few pro-Stamp Act papers (some of which were paid by British authorities) who criticized the violent protests, but they were few compared to the tax's opponents.

While most of the popular protests and riots came from Massachusetts, a few cropped up in other colonies, mainly in the north. In New York, anonymous threats against anyone who collected or used stamped papers were made, and Governor Cadwallader Colden's house was raided by two thousand people. In Rhode Island, a crowd headed by Sons of Liberty built a gallows and hanged effigies of local stamp distributors. The crowd turned into a mob later that night, headed by John Weber, who was not affiliated with or supported by the Sons of Liberty. The mob attacked the houses of said distributors and damaged their property. One of the distributors, Martin Howard, was the only prominent American to publicly support the Stamp Act. In Frederick, Maryland, a court of magistrates ruled the Stamp Act invalid and ordered that city residents ignore it. The next week, a mock funeral for the tax was carried out in the streets. Smaller protests broke out in New Hampshire, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Pennsylvania.

But the thirteen colonies that would later rebel were not the only British American colonies. The reactions to the tax in Quebec, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, and the Caribbean were more subdued. The <i>Quebec Gazette</i> suspended publication until the act was repealed. Nova Scotia's stamp distributor resigned in January 1766. There were also a few scattered protests in Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, Barbados, Antigua, St. Kitts, Nevis, Montserrat, and Jamaica. But for the most part, the outrage was localized to what would become the United States eleven years later.

The outrage to the tax shocked Parliament. They had not expected such a coordinated response from a group of colonies who had seldom worked together and failed to unite during the 1754 Albany Convention. Ideas on how to respond were mixed, with some worrying that a repeal would set a dangerous precedent for colonists to freely defy Parliament, and others fearing the potential economic suffering of the colonies the tax would cause would be too great. Repealing the tax was debated, with William Pitt, Edmund Burke, and Prime Minister Lord Rockingham arguing in favor, and George Grenville, who had been prime minister when the Stamp Act was passed, arguing in opposition. Parliament eventually decided to repeal the tax, but pass the Declaratory Act along with it, declaring that Parliament's authority to tax the colonies was absolute. They also formally condemned the riots and required compensation for those whose property had been damaged by the mobs. The act's repeal was widely celebrated throughout the colonies, and on March 21 a liberty pole was raised to commemorate the protestors' victory.

The Stamp Act Crisis was the beginning of widespread resistance to the British government. It began the discussions on ideas of liberty and self-determination, and examination of whether those rights were respected under the current system. It was the beginning in a line of offenses that would lead the thirteen colonies to declare independence.


Title: American Revolution
Description: 


Title: Stamp Act passed
Description: See "Stamp Act Crisis"


Title: Quartering Act 1765
Description: The Quartering Act 1765 was an attempt to resolve the problem of housing British soldiers stationed in the colonies. General Thomas Gage, commander-in-chief of the British Army in North America, struggled to pay for quartering and provisioning his troops. The colonies had paid for the troops during the French and Indian War, but refused to do so after the war ended, pointing out that there had been no British troops stationed there before the war and saw no need to keep them after. The British argued that the troops were necessary to protect the colonies from Indian raids like those conducted by Pontiac. Parliament's solution was the Quartering Act, which required colonies to house the soldiers in barracks and public houses, but if those ran out of room, they would be quartered in inns, livery stables, ale houses, victualing houses, and the houses of vendors of alcoholic beverages. If even this was not enough, the remaining soldiers would be housed in uninhabited houses, outhouses, barns, or other buildings. Furthermore, colonies had to foot the bill for the soldiers' housing and food. While the Quartering Act 1765 is often described in the modern day as having forced colonists to house the soldiers in their own private homes, this is in fact not true.

New Yorkers objected strongly to this bill, feeling the soldiers' presence as an invasion and them having to pay for it as an injustice. When 1500 troops arrived in New York City in 1766, the provincial government refused to house or pay for them. In support of the legislature, New York Sons of Liberty staged large protests in the city, especially around Fort George, where many soldiers were stationed. Parliament threatened to suspend New York's governor and legislature, causing the colony to back down and comply with the law. Outside New York, reaction to the Quartering Act was less visceral. Only Pennsylvania fully executed the law, though South Carolina also followed all provisions except providing salt and beer for the soldiers. Massachusetts, the center of the Stamp Act protests, initially tried to nullify the law, but when the British soldiers stationed in nearby Fort William declared a state of emergency, the legislature backed down and began senting supplies. Boston radicals objected, claiming the legislature was hypocritical for abiding by the Quartering Act when they protested the Stamp Act, causing the legislature to once again reverse their position. Massachusetts, along with most of the rest of New England, decided to ignore the law instead.


Title: Virginia Stamp Act Resolutions
Description: The Virginia Stamp Act Resolutions, also known as the Virginia Resolves, were a set of resolutions passed by the Virginia House of Burgesses in response to the passage of the Stamp Act. They were introduced by Patrick Henry, a lawyer and representative who had gained a reputation as a firebrand during the Parson's Cause trial, in which he called King George III a tyrant. He introduced five resolutions, which consisted of the following:

1) The first settlers of Virginia brought with them the same liberties, privileges, and immunities enjoyed by all British subjects.
2) Virginia's two royal charters declared the colony's settlers to be entitled to all such liberties, privileges, and immunities.
3) Only taxation determined by the people or elected representatives can protect against "a burdensome taxation," which is one such British right.
4) This right has been respected by Great Britain ever since the foundation of Virginia.
5) Therefore, only the Virginia House of Burgesses has the right to levy taxes on the Virginian people and anyone who tries to empower another entity to do the same is an enemy of freedom.

When Henry introduced the resolutions, he gave a speech, noting "Caesar had his Brutus, Charles I his Cromwell, and George III May profit by their example. If this be treason, make the most of it." By this, he meant that the British people saw Caesar and Charles I as tyrants who were executed by defenders of liberty. By likening George III to these two, he implied that the king May face a similar fate if he continued his tyranny. His speech was not well-received among the House of Burgesses, with the Speaker accusing him of treason. Nevertheless, the House passed the first four resolutions, choosing to forgo the most radical fifth. However, when colonial newspapers reported on the resolutions, they included not only the four passed ones, but the fifth one and even two more of unknown origin. These extra two read that Virginians were not bound to obey taxation law not passed by the provincial legislature, and that anyone who says otherwise should be considered an enemy to Virginia. The Stamp Act Resolutions were the first formal opposition to the Stamp Act, and outlined the positions that would be taken up by protestors across the colonies.

Text: https://bit.ly/2UZ7lRF


Title: War of the Regulation
Description: The War of the Regulation was a class conflict in North Carolina. Poor farmers, strained by drought, economic turmoil, and an influx of wealthy lawyers and merchants in the west, grew angry at the corruption of public officlas. On June 6, 1765, George Sims gave the Nutbush Address, complaining about public officials charging Granville County residents fees. Officers were greedy and worked together to maximize their personal gain. Large percentages of taxes went to the collectors. The system of corruption was supported by William Tryon, North Carolina's governor. The poor citizens began organzing in protest of the system, intending to change the system to a more fair and honest one. In 1768, the organizers, called the Regulators, intruded in the colonial court while officials were trying several Regulator leaders and dragged who they viewed as corrupt officials through the streets. They then began rioting, destroying public and private property and beating several of the lawyers they viewed as antagonists. Edmund Fanning, the main opponent of the Regulators, received the worst of the beatings and his house was destroyed by the rioters. In 1771, Captain Benjamin Merrill, a Regulator leader, led a force of 2000 regulators against Governor Tryon and General Hugh Waddell's force of 1200 in Orange County. Merrill's intention was to use their superior numbers to scare Tryon into accepting his demands, but fighting soon broke out, at least a dozen were killed, and the Regulators surrendered. Most were pardoned, though six of the ringleaders were executed for treason, including Merrill. Tryon's militiamen then traveled through Regulator territory and forced those he found to sign loyalty oaths. Tryon was initially praised by the public, but upon further investigation was criticized for his harsh treatment of the Regulators, especially of his executions. Though the rebellion did not change much, some view it as one of the early fights in the Revolutionary War.


Title: Rockingham Ministry
Description: 


Title: Massachusetts governor's house ransacked
Description: See "Stamp Act Crisis"


Title: Stamp Act Congress
Description: The Stamp Act Congress was a meeting of 27 delegates from the British colonies that took place in New York City in response to the passage of the Stamp Act by Parliament. The Massachusetts General Assembly issued a letter in June calling for delegates to meet in New York City to discuss how to respond to the new tax. Nine colonial legislatures, including Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware, and South Carolina, appointed delegates to attend the meeting. The governors of Virginia, North Carolina, and Georgia prevented their colonies from attending, and New Hampshire declined due her preoccupation with an economic crisis. Nova Scotia was a strong economic partner with Massachusetts, but were stronger partners with England, and so declined to attend. Newfoundland, Quebec, East Florida, and West Florida did not have legislatures and so were not invited. The Congress elected Timothy Ruggles as its chairmain, and included other famous delegates like future Articles of Confederation author John Dickinson and future chief justice John Rutledge.

The Congressional deliberations were conducted in secret, and discussed how the colonies should respond to Parliament’s Sugar and Stamp Acts. They debated the differences between direct and indirect taxation. Traditionally, the British and the colonists had become accustomed the regulation of trade, such as import duties. This was called indirect taxation, and was exemplified by the Navigation Acts. The Stamp Act was a significant departure from this long-standing tradition by directly taxing items. On October 14, the Congress drafted and adopted the Declaration of Rights and Grievances, asserting fourteen points about the colonists’ rights as Englishmen and how Parliament was violating them. The Stamp Act Congress also wrote petitions to the king, House of Commons, and House of Lords asking them to repeal the tax, which were promptly ignored. Though the Stamp Act Congress was largely inconsequential in the attempt to repeal the Stamp Act, it was one of the first meetings of the British colonies to act as one voice, and the first of such to be conducted successfully. It prompted Parliament to pass the Declaratory Act, which intended to prevent such a meeting from taking place again. The Stamp Act Congress would later serve as inspiration for the 1774 and 1775 Continental Congresses.


Title: Declaration of Rights and Grievances
Description: A document passed by the Stamp Act Congress in protest of the eponymous tax passed by Great Britain earlier that year. The declaration consisted of the following fourteen points:

1) American colonists owe the Crown the same allegiance as those born in Great Britain do
2) American colonists are hence entitled to all the same rights that British subjects enjoy
3) Taxation without consent by the people or their representatives infringes upon those rights
4) American colonists cannot be represented by those in the House of Commons
5) Only elected colonial assemblies have the right to tax the colonists, as they are the only ones that are true representatives of the people
6) It goes against "the spirit of the British constitution" to give King George colonists' property
7) The right to a jury trial is another right that all British subjects are entitled to
8) The Stamp Act infringes upon the colonists' rights by extending the powers of the courts of admiralty
9) The payment of the new taxes are "impracticable"
10) Paying for the manufactures that the colonies are required to trade with results in King George amassing a large amount of wealth
11) The trade restriction placed on the colonies prevents the colonists from paying the manufactures
12) The happiness and success of the colonies depend on the full enjoyment of its people's rights, as well as a good relationship with Great Britain
13) British subjects have the right to petition both the king or Parliament.
14) It is the duty of the colonies to petition for the repeal of the Stamp Act

Text: https://bit.ly/2FKH2tq


Title: Stamp Act comes into effect
Description: See "Stamp Act Crisis"


Title: <i>An Inquiry into the Rights of the British Colonies</i>
Description: An Inquiry into the Rights of the British Colonies was an essay written by Richard Bland, a Virginian planter, delegate in the House of Burgesses, and Thomas Jefferson's cousin. It is a response to the argument that Parliament has the right to tax the colonies, specifically in regards to the Stamp Act.

He opens by conceding that Parliament has the power to impose taxes, as it has the "Fleets and Armies of the Kingdom" at its command. But Parliament insists not only on its power but on its right, which is illegitimate. He "cannot comprehend how Men who are excluded from voting at the Election of Members of Parliament can be represented in that Assembly, or how those who are elected do not sit in the House as Representatives of their Constituents." He writes not only of the colonists, but also of the British in Great Britain who cannot vote either. 

Bland asserts that "it is a Fact, as certain as History can make it," that the British Constitution is derived from the time of King Vortiger, a 5th-century Saxon and King of the Britons. The English government is based on theirs, "founded upon Principles of the most perfect Liberty." One of these principles was a land-owner, which Bland calls a "Freeman," having the right to a seat in Parliament. At some point, this changed so that representatives were elected by these land-owners to Parliament instead of the land-owners themselves. At any rate, every Freeman could vote in Parliament, either in person or through a representative. At some point a statute was created that deprived these Freemen of the ability to vote for their representative. If Parliament's argument of "virtual representation" was accurate, this statute would not have deprived them of anything, as the Freemen would be as represented as they would be if they could vote for their MP. "But when by the fundamental Principles of the Constitution they were to be considered as Members of the Legislature, and as such had a right to be present in Person, or to send their Procurators or Attornies, and by them to give their Suffrage in the supreme Council of the Nation, this Statute deprived them of an essential Right... they could not be represented, but were placed in the same Condition with the Non-Proprietors of Land."

"From hence it is evident that the Obligation of the Laws of Parliament upon the People of Britain who have no Right to be Electors does not arise from their being virtually represented, but from a quit [sic] different Principle; a Principle of the Law of Nature, true, certain, and universal, applicable to every Sort of Government, and not contrary to the common Understandings of Mankind."

"If what you say is real Fact, that the nine Tenths of the People of Britain are deprived of the high Privilege of being Electors, it shows a great Defect in the present Constitution, which has departed so much from its original Purity."

He writes that if 90% of the British people are not represented, then the colonists, "who are considered by the British Government itself, in every Instance of Parliamentary Legislation, as a distinct People," certainly aren't.

He concludes with an observation that "when Subjects are deprived of their civil Rights, or are dissatisfied with the Place they hold in the Community, they have a natural Right to quit the Society of which they are Members, and to reture into another Country," thereby reclaiming "their natural Freedom and Independence."

The essay was originally published in Wilmington, Virginia, and was reprinted in England. It was less influential than other contemporary anti-Stamp Act essays because it was not circulated as much. But it was the first of these to complete the argument of "no taxation without representation." Thomas Jefferson complimented his cousin's work, calling it "the first pamphlet on the nature of the connection with Great Britain which had any pretension to accuracy of view on that subject... There was more sound matter in his pamphlet than in the celebrated Farmer's letters." Bland would share these views in the First Continental Congress in 1774, which would end up in its Declaration of Rights.


Title: Benjamin Franklin questioned by Parliament about the Stamp Act
Description: Book of Ages, page 143


Title: Declaratory Act
Description: The Declaratory Act was an attempt by Parliament to assert its authority over the colonies. It followed the protests over the Sugar Act, and the even larger protests over the Stamp Act. Colonists objected to the Stamp Act in large part because they could not vote in parliamentary elections, and therefore believed they were not fairly represented in Parliament. It was an enumerated British right to not be taxed without representation, so colonists believed the Stamp Act violated their rights. Parliament conceded defeat and repealed the Stamp Act, but accompanied it with this declaration. It stated that Parliament in no uncertain terms had equal authority over the colonies as they did the island of Great Britain. It declared that the colonists did indeed have representation in Parliament, as did everyone else in the British Empire, even if it wasn't direct. Therefore, Parliament would consider the chant of "no taxation without representation" invalid. The colonists were not fans of the Declaratory Act, fearing it would open the door to taxes like the Stamp Act in the future. Parliament, for their part, would not pass a direct tax again, choosing to use customs and duties like the colonists were used to.


Title: Stamp Act repealed
Description: See "Stamp Act Crisis"


Title: Liberty Poles
Description: A liberty pole was a wooden pole with a Phrygian cap from the Netherlands on top. They served as symbols of displeasure with British authority and, of course, support of liberty. The first of these was erected in New York City on May 21, 1766, three days after the repeal of the highly unpopular Stamp Act, in celebration of the event. The British saw it as a symbol of defiance and a reminder of the New York government's refusal to enforce the tax, and chopped down the pole in August. Another pole came up quickly and was cut down as quickly. A third pole came up that stayed up until the next year, when British soldiers cut it down after seeing colonists use it to celebrate the Stamp Act repeal anniversary. A fourth pole was put up, secured by iron bands, but that too would come down. This one was put up to protest the Quartering Act. New York saw the act as an infringement of liberty and refused to implement it, prompting Parliament to dissolve the provincial assembly and replace it with a more cooperative one. Outraged, the Sons of Liberty posted a broadside titled "To the Betrayed Inhabitants of the City and Colony of New York," complaining about the British decision. Angered by this broadside, British officials exploded the pole and posted their own pamphlets labeling the Sons of Liberty as enemies of society.

On January 19, 1770, merchant Isaac Sears gathered a group to prevent the soldiers from distributing these pamphlets. They captured a few soldiers, while a large number of New Yorkers and British soldiers appeared. The soldiers were outnumbered and began falling back to their barracks, but upon reaching Golden Hill, an officer ordered them to cut through the protestors with bayonets. A brief scuffle ensued, but another officer arrived and broke up the situation in time to prevent all but a few injuries. A final liberty pole was raised on February 6, which stayed up for good. Though a relatively minor conflict, the "Battle" of Golden Hill was the first real one between colonists and British soldiers, even before the Boston Massacre.


Title: Pitt the Elder Ministry
Description: 


Title: <b>Townshend Act Crisis</b>
Description: The Townshend Act Crisis was a period of unrest in the British American colonies, over the Townshend Acts. These were a series of laws passed by Great Britain and orchestrated by British Chancellor of the Exchequer Charles Townshend. They consisted of the following:

1) The New York Restraining Act of 1767: Forbade the NY Assembly and governor from passing laws until they complied with the Quartering Act. This was never implemented because NY complied with the Quartering Act before it was passed.

2) The Revenue Act of 1767: Taxed glass, lead, paint, tea, oil, and paper. The taxes were indirect, being collected by regulating trade. It was implemented after the passionate and sometimes violent protests that erupted after the Stamp Act was passed, which directly taxed paper. Townshend believed that the Stamp Act being a direct tax was one of the main reasons colonists objected to it, and if Great Britain went back to the old method of taxing by regulating trade, which the long-standing Navigation Acts used, there would be less uproar. Indeed, though there were immediate protests from merchants, the initial reaction to the Townshend Acts were more muted than those to the Stamp Act. However, Townshend was incorrect in his belief; the colonists objected to the Stamp Act primarily because they believed they lacked real representation in Parliament. Great Britain had attempted to end this line of argument with the Declaratory Act in 1766, but that did not convince the colonists. Under this line of reasoning, the Townshend Acts were no different than the Stamp Act. Most controversially, the Revenue Act legalized "writs of assistance," or general warrants used by customs officials to search suspected smugglers for goods, which colonists feared violated their rights.

3) The Indemnity Act of 1767: Reduced taxes on tea sold by the British East India Company. The law was intended not only to keep British tea competitive with Dutch tea, which was often smuggled into the colonies, but also to keep the British East India Company afloat, as it had been teetering on the edge of bankruptcy.

4) The Commissioners of Customs Act of 1767: Created a Customs Board that enforced shipping regulations and increased tax revenue. Previously, customs were handled by the Customs Board in England, but was unable to enforce taxes in the colonies due to the large distance between them. The new Customs Board was established in Boston, and was much more active in its prosecutions, though was also rife with corruption.

5) The Vice Admiralty Act of 1768: Gave Royal naval courts, instead of colonial courts, jurisdiction over all matters concerning customs or smuggling. It was passed a year after the others, after Charles Townshend died. It was intended to aid the prosecution of smugglers, whom the British government feared would often get too light of a sentence from a local jury that may be benefiting from the smuggler's business. Suspected smugglers could already be tried in a Royal naval court in Halifax, Nova Scotia, but just one location was inconvenient to use if the smuggler lived far away. The Vice Admiralty Act opened new courts in Boston, Philadelphia, and Charleston, which would dramatically increase the number of suspected smugglers tried in these courts. These courts were run entirely by royally appointed judges without option for a jury. Additionally, the judges would receive a 5% cut of any fine they levied on a smuggler they convicted, opening another opportunity for corruption. Finally, suspected smugglers were required to travel to the courts on their own expense, and were found automatically guilty if they did not show.

Though Townshend knew these laws would be controversial, he was not prepared for the level of outrage that came from the colonies. Colonists maintained that the Townshend Acts were "taxation without representation" and was unconstitutional. They feared the writs of assistance and vice admiralty courts further violated their rights. Especially outrageous was the fact that the money raised from the Revenue Act would go towards paying the salaries of colonial governors and judges. This simultaneously took money from the colonies and placed the already royally appointed governors and judges even more under the thumb of Great Britain.

In protest, John Dickinson anonymously wrote a series of twelve essays collectively titled, "Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania," in which he rejected the new import duties as just as illegitimate as the Stamp Act and encouraged all colonists to stand up against the Townshend Acts, especially Massachusetts, who had become famous for its protests since the Stamp Act Crisis. He sent the letters to James Otis of Massachusetts, who vehemently protested the writs of assistance. The Massachusetts House of Representatives issued a circular letter, written by Samuel Adams, attempting to recruit colonies to a resistance movement against the Townshend Acts. Several colonies, including Massachusetts, sent petitions to King George III to repeal the laws, to no avail. Virginia and Pennsylvania also sent petitions to Parliament, which refused to even consider them. Shocked by the Massachusetts Circular Letter, British Colonial Secretary Lord Hillsborough ordered Massachusetts Governor Francis Bernard to order the House of Representatives to rescind the letter. The legislature refused, and was dissolved by Bernard as punishment. They were not allowed to convene until the end of May the next year, and even then the representatives found British cannons pointing at their meeting place. When the Virginia House of Burgesses passed a resolution declaring Parliament had no right to tax them without representation, they were dissolved by their governor as well.

Meanwhile, colonists began boycotting British goods in protest. Boston merchants organized the first non-importation agreement on January 1 1768, calling for the suspension of purchasing certain British goods. A similar agreement, called the Virginia Association, was organized in the eponymous colony by George Washington and George Mason on May 17, 1769. Some women spun and wove textiles themselves for colonists to purchase instead of British goods, nicknamed the Daughters of Liberty. Colonists felt that the boycotts gave them a spirit of virtuous self-sacrifice, as opposed to British extravagance. Virginian planters supported the boycott, as many of them were in debt and could use the boycott as an excuse to stop purchasing British goods without appearing to be struggling financially. Urban artisans enjoyed less overseas competition from the boycott, of which they quickly became fervent supporters. The boycott was moderately successful, reducing British imports by 38%, but that was not as much as the organizers had hoped for.

The new Customs Board was based in Boston, sensible as it was one of the largest port cities in the British North American colonies. However, it was also the source of the most passionate anti-tax protests, both for the Stamp Act in 1765 and now the Townshend Acts. The protests were so fervent that the military stepped in to help enforce the customs. As part of this help, in May 1768, the HMS Romney, a fifty-gun warship, arrived in Boston Harbor. The Romney began impressing Bostonian sailors, and in June captured a sloop called the Liberty, run by merchant John Hancock, on suspicion of smuggling. Bostonians began to riot in protest, causing the customs officials to flee to Castle William for protection. Hillsborough ordered Bernard to search for evidence of treason. If he found any, suspects would be extradited to Great Britain for the trial. Though no evidence of treason was found, the threat shocked Bostonians. Hancock was tried in a vice admiralty court for smuggling, defended by lawyer John Adams, in a highly publicized trial, but charges were eventually dropped. Great Britain had already decided to send troops into Boston to quell the protests, but after the Liberty riots General Thomas Gage was convinced to send four regiments (4000 soldiers). The news caused quite an alarm in Boston; Samuel Adams convened an extralegal meeting between towns and passed a resolution protesting what they saw as an occupation, but was unable to stop the troops from arriving on October 1. The anonymously written "Journal of Occurences" tracked clashes between Bostonians and troops. On February 22, 1770, a Bostonian teenager was killed by a customs official. Though the troops were not involved, it only increased tensions between them and the Bostonians. This tension culminated on March 5, when Bostonians harassing the soldiers were fired upon, with five deaths, known as the Boston Massacre.

On the same day as the massacre, though only by coincidence, as news traveled slowly at the time and no one outside of Boston knew of the incident that day, Lord North, the new Prime Minister, called for the repeal of the Townshend Acts. It was agreed upon that all the acts would be repealed except for the tax on tea, in order to continue asserting Parliament's legitimacy in taxing the colonies. Despite being partial, the repeal was considered a success for the colonial protestors, who ended the non-importation. Merchants began paying for large amounts of British tea, tax included, though mainly in Boston; smuggled Dutch tea remained supreme in New York City and Philadelphia.

In a sense, the Townshend Acts Crisis was merely a repetition of the Stamp Act Crisis, though this time with added stakes. Now 4000 troops were stationed in Boston, five colonists were killed by said troops, rioters were threatened with treason, and the colonists were angrier than ever. The next law on the colonies and subsequent protest would only escalate the situation further.


Title: New York Restraining Act 1767
Description: See "Townshend Act Crisis"


Title: Revenue Act 1767
Description: See "Townshend Act Crisis"


Title: Commissioners of Customs Act 1767
Description: See "Townshend Act Crisis"


Title: Indemnity Act 1767
Description: See "Townshend Act Crisis"


Title: Mason-Dixon Line surveyed
Description: See "Maryland-Pennsylvania-Delaware border dispute"


Title: <i>Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania</i>
Description: A series of essays written by lawyer John Dickinson in which he argued against the Townshend Acts. He claimed that only the colonial elected assemblies had the right to raise revenue, and that they would set an unwanted precedent for taxation without representation, meaning that the colonists could not back down. The letters provided unity among opponents to the taxes and changed how the colonists thought about the role of government.

The Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania were essays written by lawyer John Dickinson. Addressed "to the inhabitants of the British Colonies," he wrote anonymously, claiming to be an educated farmer of modest means on the Delaware River in Pennsylvania. His first letter, published on December 2, 1767, laments the muted reaction to the newly-passed Townshend Acts.


Title: Massachusetts Circular Letter
Description: The Massachusetts Circular Letter was an essay written by Samuel Adams and James Otis, delegates to the Massachusetts House of Representatives, to protest the Townshend Acts.

Adams and Otis assert that "Parliament is the supreme legislative power over the whole empire," but that its powes are derived from a fixed constitution. One integral part of this constitution, "ever held sacred and irrevocable by the subjects within the realm," is that one cannot have is property taken without his consent. As British subjects, Americans too are entitled to this right. The Stamp Act is an infringement on that right, as they are not represented in Parliament, so their consent cannot be given. Adams does not advocate for representation in Parliament, as "it will forever be impracticable" due to "being separated by an ocean of a thousand leagues." The kings and queens that wrote the colonial charters knew this, and allowed for them to set up their own local governments instead, who would be much more capable of responding to the colonists' needs.

Adams and Otis also question the wisdom of the lack of popular accountability for certain government officials. "If the Crown, in addition to its undoubted authority of constituting a Governor, should appoint him such a stipend as it May judge proper, without the consent of the people, and at their expense," and do the same for judges, it May "subvert the principles of equity, and endanger the happiness and security of the subject."

Finally, Adams and Otis assure Parliament that whatever they May have heard, the colonies were not "factious, disloyal, and having a disposition to make themselves independent of the mother country," and that he is sure that "the united and dutiful supplications of [the king's] distressed American subjects, will meet with his royal and favorable acceptance."

The letter was approved by the Massachusetts House of Representatives and sent to be distributed across the colonies. When British Colonial Secretary Lord Hillsborough became aware of the letter, he ordered the Massachusetts government to revoke it. When they voted 92-17 to refuse, Massachusetts Governor Francis Bernard dissolved them. Massachusetts colonists, now deprived of their government, took to the streets to protest. These protests would culminate in the 1768 Liberty Riot, which would prompt Great Britain to send 4000 troops to Boston.


Title: <i>Liberty</i> Riot
Description: A riot that broke out after the detaining of the Liberty, a sloop captained by John Hancock, a wealthy Bostonian merchant and future American revolutionary. The Liberty had been detained because of an accusation that he had been attempting to evade paying duties for bottles of wine he was carrying. British customs officials seized the sloop and towed it away towards the HMS Romney, an illegal act. Bostonians were also mad that the Romney had been impressing American sailors, and began to riot against the British. The customs officials reported back to Great Britain, complaining that they felt unsafe in Boston. In response, 4000 British troops were sent to the city to maintain order. The Liberty was commissioned into the Royal Navy but was soon burned by angry locals in Newport, RI. Tensions grew between the Bostonians and troops, which erupted in the 1770 Boston Massacre.


Title: Vice Admiralty Court Act 1768
Description: 


Title: British troops arrive in Boston
Description: 


Title: Journal of Occurences
Description: 


Title: Grafton Ministry
Description: 


Title: Treaty of Fort Stanwix (1768)
Description: 


Title: Pennamite-Yankee Wars
Description: The Pennamite-Yankee Wars were a border dispute between Pennsylvania (the Pennamites) and Connecticut (the Yankees) over the Wyoming Valley. Not to be confused with the modern-day state, the Wyoming Valley is located southeast of Lake Erie. Both Pennsylvania and Connecticut had been granted access to the land through their charters, and had both purchased it from the native Susquehannocks, creating a border dispute. In 1769, Connecticut attempted to assert its claim by sending settlers to establish the town of Wilkes-Barre. Pennsylvania countered by sending armed settlers to drive the Yankees out of Wilkes-Barre. Though called a war, there were only three casualties throughout the entire thirty years. In 1773, King George III confirmed Connecticut to have the legitimate claim, prompting Yankees to form another town, Westmoreland, in the region, but the Pennamites again forcefully drove them out. The dispute remained through 1782, when the Confederate Congress overturned the king's decree and declared Pennsylvania to have the right to the Wyoming Valley. However, the Pennamites once again insisted on driving the Yankees out of the region, feeling as if they were not truly in control if the Yankees were still there. The conflict escalated in 1784, when Vermont and Connecticut began sending armed men to the Wyoming Valley to defend the settlers, and Pennsylvania sent General John Armstrong. Armstrong negotiated a truce between the two sides, but then took the Yankees prisoner when they were defenseless, turning public favor towards the Yankees. The dispute was finally resolved in 1799, when it was agreed that Pennsylvania would get to control the Wyoming Valley if the Yankees were allowed to remain in their settlements and become Pennsylvanian citizens. The 1782 decision is the only interstate dispute resolved by the Confederate Congress.


Title: Colonial population exceeds 2 million
Description: Total colonial population is 2,148,076.

Virginia                                   : 447,016
Pennsylvania                      : 240,057
Massachusetts                 : 235,808
Maryland                              : 202,599
North Carolina                  : 197,200
Connecticut                       : 183,881
New York                             : 162,920
South Carolina                  : 124,244
New Jersey                         : 117,431
Rhode Island                        : 58,196
New Hampshire                : 62,396
Delaware                              : 35,496
Maine (part of MA)           : 31,257
Georgia                                   : 23,375
Kentucky (part of VA)    : 15,700
Vermont (part of NY)     : 10,000
Tennessee (part of NC): 1000


Title: Battle of Golden Hill
Description: See "Liberty Poles"


Title: North Ministry
Description: 


Title: <b>Boston Massacre</b>
Description: The Boston Massacre was a brawl between Boston civilians and British soldiers. Boston had for the last decade been the hotbed of unrest against perceived British transgressions against colonists' rights. This unrest prompted Parliament and British General Thomas Gage to send 4000 troops into the city. The tension only worsened from there, especially upon the death of Christopher Seider, an eleven-year-old boy killed by a customs employee on February 22, 1770. The tension was bound to erupt, and came to a head just a few weeks after Seider's death. On March 5, Private Hugh White stood guard outside the Boston Customs House when he began to be harassed by a small group of civilians, including 13-year-old Edward Garrick, who began poking White in the chest. White smacked Garrick with his musket in retaliation, attracting a larger crowd. Church bells, normally used to warn townspeople of fires, were rung, drawing people out of their homes and increasing the crowd size to around fifty. The civilians were led by a half-black, half-Indian former slave named Crispus Attucks, who began throwing snowballs at White and challenging him to fire at the crowd.

The commotion attracted the attention of Captain Thomas Preston, the officer at a nearby barracks, who dispatched an officer and six privates to defend White. The reinforcements muscled their way through the crowd to the customs house stairs, where White had retreated to. By this point, the crowd numbered in the hundreds. One of the Bostonians, Henry Knox, warned Captain Preston that if the soldiers fired, they would have to die. The crowd began hurling rocks and oyster shells at the soldiers, and dared them to open fire. A civilian, Richard Palmes, approached Preston with a cudgel and asked if the soldiers' rifles were loaded. Preston told him that they were, but they would not fire unless he ordered it, which he was not likely to do as he was standing directly in front of his men. One of the soldiers, Private Hugh Montgomery, was then knocked over by a thrown object, prompting him to fire his musket into the crowd despite not receiving an order to do so. Palmes then swung his cudgel at both Montgomery and Preston. After a brief pause, the soldiers began opening fire indiscriminately into the crowd without orders, hitting eleven. Three civilians died instantly, including Crispus Attucks, ropemaker Samuel Gray, and mariner James Caldwell. Two more died of their wounds later; 17-year-old apprentice Samuel Maverick the next morning, and Irish immigrant Patrick Carr two weeks later. Attucks' death is often considered the first of the American Revolution.

The crowd withdrew from the immediate area but began growing elsewhere. Preston called for more reinforcements to gather outside the customs office, and even Governor Thomas Hutchinson arrived, who managed to calm the crowd slightly by promising an inquiry. Preston and the eight soldiers were arrested, and the governor's council voted to recall the rest of the troops stationed in Boston to nearby Castle William. Secretary of State Andrew Oliver wrote that if the troops had not been recalled, the people likely would have attacked them further, which would provoke Parliament to declare the colony to be in rebellion and revoke their charter.

A fierce propaganda battle ensued between the two political factions in Boston, the Patriots and Loyalists, both determined to spin the events of March 5 to suit their agenda. The Boston Gazette criticized the presence of troops in the city, and cited the event an ongoing attempt to "quell a Spirit of Liberty." By far the most effective and famous piece of propaganda was produced by Patriot silversmith Henry Pelham. He created an engraving of the event, depicting Preston ordering an ordered row of soldiers to fire into a helpless crowd outside "Butcher's Hall." Fellow silversmith Paul Revere copied the engraving and circulated it widely throughout the colonies. The engraving was also printed in the Boston Gazette, where it was called a "massacre." For many, this interpretation was the only perspective they had on the event, which of course enraged them against the British troops.

The Massachusetts government wished to give the soldiers a fair trial so as to not draw ire from Great Britain and to not alienate moderates from the Patriot movement. John Adams, a Patriot who had written the Braintree Instructions during the Stamp Act crisis, was asked to defend the soldiers. The trial began on November 27. Adams described the Bostonian crowd as a "motley rabble of saucy boys" and other unsavory characters. He argued that Attucks appeared dangerous and acted overly aggressively towards the soldiers, and that they had only fired in retaliation for repeated attacks. The surgeon of Patrick Carr testified that the immigrant forgave whoever shot him, believing that it was only in self-defense. The jury agreed with Adams and acquitted six of the soldiers, convicting the other two of manslaughter because of strong evidence that they had fired directly into the crowd. This verdict suggests the jury believed the soldiers were justified in defending themselves but should have waited for orders before firing. The convicted soldiers had their sentences reduced from death to branding of the thumb. Four of the civilians involved in the massacre were also tried, but were all acquitted.

The Boston Massacre is considered to be one of the most important events in the American Revolution. The propagandistic engraving played a large part in turning public colonial opinion against British authority. It would be just the first in a series of violent outbursts between colonists and Brits in the years to come.

Casualties:
3 Bostonians killed on scene
2 Bostonians died from gunshot wounds later


Title: Most Townshend Acts repealed
Description: 


Title: Battle of Alamance
Description: 


Title: Boston Pamphlet
Description: 


Title: Virginia legislature petitions the Crown to raise import duties on slaves
Description: Source: http://slavenorth.com/chance.htm, "Journals of the House of Burgesses," April 1, 1772, p.131.


Title: <i>Gaspee</i> Affair
Description: The HMS Gaspee was a schooner captained by Lieutenant William Dudingston whose job was to enforce the Navigation Acts by collecting customs from merchants in port towns. Parliament was still in need of money, both to pay off the debts it accrued from the Seven Years' War and to pay the troops stationed in the North American colonies. They had previously tried to pay these with the Stamp Act tax, but was unsuccessful because of the outrage and objection from the colonists over its legality. The Navigation Acts, part of which levied import duties on various goods, were still in effect, however, and had been so since 1561. Great Britain hoped that such an old tax would draw less attention than one recently passed like the Stamp Act.

The Gaspee in particular was assigned to Narragansett Bay by the Province of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, arriving in February 1772. Alongside Boston, Rhode Island was especially hostile to these customs ships, as much of their revenue depended on trade and they viewed the Navigation Acts as threats to their business. In years prior fellow customs schooners like the HMS St John and the HMS Liberty had been attacked by angry sailors. The Gaspee was hostile in return, gaining a reputation for aggressive behavior in Narragansett Bay. On February 17, the Gaspee seized a boat called the Fortune, confiscating its shipment of rum. Dudingston sent the Fortune to Boston to await trial. Providencers objected strongly, pointing out that the colony's royal charter specified that an arrest that took place in the colony must hold the trial in the colony as well.

On the night of June 9, the Gaspee was chasing the Hannah, a packet ship (a medium-sized passenger and freight boat), and ran aground in the shallow waters of the northwestern section of the bay. Dudingston decided to wait until high tide in the hopes that the ship would be set free, but before that could happen a group of angry Rhode Islanders, many of whom were Sons of Liberty, led by local merchant John Brown, showed up, taking opportunity of the Gaspee's vulnerability to get rid of it. The group rowed up to the boat in the early morning of June 10 and captured the boat. Dudingston was shot in the groin by Joseph Bucklin and the Gaspee was burned.

Though prior customs boat attacks had gone unpunished, Great Britain this time decided to put its foot down. It gathered the Royal Commission of Inquiry, made up of the chiefs of the supreme courts of Massachusetts, New York, and New Jersey, the judge of the vice-admiralty of Boston, and Governor Joseph Wanton of Rhode Island. The Commission was tasked with finding evidence of treason, the finding of which would mean extradition to England for the suspects to be tried. Though the Commission was unable to find any such evidence, colonists were nonetheless shocked at the prospect. Most condemned the burning of the Gaspee, but saw the treason charge as a gross overreaction. The Virginia House of Burgesses established intercolonial committees of correspondence. The Reverend John Allen took advantage of the incident to preach about greedy monarchs and corrupt judges in England, a sermon that was printed and circulated widely throughout the colonies. This incident was just one of many that led to rising tensions between Great Britain and her colonies.


Title: Sheffield Declaration
Description: 


Title: <b>Tea Act</b>
Description: An act granting the British East India Company a monopoly on tea sales in America. The company was highly profitable to the British Empire, but was beginning to fail due to a lack of sales of tea. Desperate to keep it afloat, Parliament passed the Tea Act, hoping that a monopoly on the colonial market would help the company rebound. However, the colonists were less than pleased with this turn of affairs, who were once again upset that such major economic decisions that affected their livelihood were being made without their consent or with any say in their passage. Less than a year later, the Sons of Liberty organized the Boston Tea Party as an act of defiance against the tax and the 1773 act.

The Tea Act was passed by Parliament primarily to assist the failing East India Company. The business was highly profitable for the British Empire, but was struggling, due in part to a lack of tea sales. The British East India Company sold tea wholesale to colonial merchants, who put it up for retail sale for the end consumer. The British government charged the merchants a tax every time they purchased this tea from the company. While the tax was lowered in 1767 by the one remaining Townshend Act, it was still money the merchants did not want to pay. Cheaper for them was Dutch tea, which charged no such import duties. Legally, colonial merchants were required to purchase exclusively British tea, so any Dutch tea they possessed was classified as smuggled property. Nevertheless, merchants were usually willing to take the risk of being caught. Great Britain and her American colonies were large markets for the smuggled tea, and the British East India Company was losing £400,000 a year from it. The Dutch tea was generally considered lower in quality, though drinking it was encouraged by the Sons of Liberty as a form of protest against the Townshend Acts. The British East India Company, which supplied the tea, was in dire financial straits due to a famine in Bengal that limited its supply, low sales in Europe, and contractual annual payments to the British government, and the lack of tea sales in America was not helping.

Prime Minister Lord North resolved to solve these issues with the Tea Act. This allowed the East India Company to export tea directly to the colonies, without having to sell it to merchants or pay import duties. Since both import duties and the markups merchants made to make a profit while retail selling made the tea more expensive, in effect the Tea Act made tea much cheaper for colonists. The idea was to make British tea cheaper than smuggled Dutch tea, encouraging the colonists to purchase the former, helping out the company in its time of need. Additionally, the Townshend Act tax on tea, which the colonists had been complaining was passed without their representation and so was illegitimate, would still apply to the British tea. Therefore, if the colonists wanted to purchase the cheaper tea, they would be forced to accept the tax and Parliament's ability to levy them.

The tea tax had been around since 1767, but had not caused much uproar since the other Townshend Acts were repealed, since most merchants were buying smuggled tea and didn't have to pay the tax, so they didn't pay it much mind. But the Tea Act would force them to pay it, which would bring up the same objections the colonists had had to it back during the Townshend Act Crisis. When the Tea Act was passed, removing the tax was debated, as some members of Parliament feared that it would stoke another unnecessary controversy in the colonies. But Lord North wanted the revenue the tax provided to pay the colonial governors and judges, in order to remove influence from the legislatures.

It was on mainly this final point, as well as the old "no taxation without representation," that colonists would end up objecting to this act. Merchants, who had a large presence in port cities like Boston, also feared that their business would be threatened by them being cut out of tea sales. As usual, the colonists protested the latest objectionable Parliamentary action. In New York City and Philadelphia, tea was returned to Great Britain, and those selling the tea were forced to resign. In Charleston, the same happened, except the tea was abandoned at the harbor. Most shocking of all, however, came once again from Boston, as a group of Sons of Liberty raided a ship and dumped its entire cargo of tea into the harbor. This incident enraged Great Britain and led to the passage of the Intolerable Acts, a major step towards the American Revolution.


Title: Hutchinson Letters leaked
Description: 


Title: <b>Boston Tea Party</b>
Description: The Boston Tea Party was a protest organized by the Boston Sons of Liberty in objection to the 1768 tea tax and 1773 Tea Act. The Tea Act was controversial across the colonies, and soon after its passage protests erupted in Boston, New York City, Philadelphia, and Charleston, where the first shipments of British tea were sent. In the latter three cities, protestors were successfully able to force those selling the tea to resign, and in New York City and Philadelphia the tea cargo ships were sent back to Great Britain. Boston protestors, led by Samuel Adams, planned something similar, but Governor Thomas Hutchinson prevented the ships from leaving. By law, the tea had to have import duties paid within twenty days of the ship arriving in the harbor, else it could be confiscated by customs officials. With Bostonians refusing to pay the duty and unload the tea, and Hutchinson refusing to let the ships leave, that twenty-day deadline passed on December 16 while the ships were still in harbor.

Realizing their protest was going nowhere, between 30 and 130 Bostonians resolved to raid three of the ships. A few of the protestors dressed up as Mohawk Indians to hide their identity, due to the illegality of what they were about to do. Mohawk Indians were chosen because they, and other Indian tribes, were often seen by the colonists as symbols of America. The protestors boarded the ships and threw their entire cargo of tea into Boston Harbor. 342 chests, or 92,000 pounds of tea were thrown overboard, costing the British East India Company £9,659, or roughly 1.7 million modern-day US dollars. None of the ship's crew were injured, and the protestors took great care not to damage anything on the ships besides the tea. All that was damaged was a padlock, which was replaced the next day by the Whigs. The incident was known at the time as "the destruction of the tea," but in 1834 was called "the Boston Tea Party," which it is referred to as today.

It is unknown whether Samuel Adams arranged the protest, but he publicized and defended it, arguing that the perpetrators were protecting their constitutional rights. It was Great Britain's turn to be shocked. Even members of Parliament who normally defended the colonists condemned what they saw as lawless violence and destruction of property. The idea that the protestors should get away free was not shared even among Whigs; Benjamin Franklin reccomended that the East India Company be compensated for its losses. New York merchant Robert Murray approached Prime Minister Lord North and offered to do just that, but was turned down. Instead, Parliament resolved to punish the whole of Boston with a vengeance. The punishments were called "the Coercive Acts" in Great Britain, but were nicknamed "the Intolerable Acts" in the colonies. The Boston Tea Party and Intolerable Acts were major contributors to the American Revolution. Similar demonstrations occurred across the colonies, indicating that it was not just Boston that objected. The Boston Tea Party enraged Great Britain, and the Intolerable Acts terrified the colonies, some of whom began arming themselves, which would lead to the first battles of the Revolutionary War.


Title: <i>A Summary View of the Rights of British America</i>
Description: 


Title: <b>Intolerable Acts</b>
Description: The Intolerable Acts were a series of four laws passed to punish Massachusetts for the Boston Tea Party. They consisted of the following: 

1) Boston Port Act: Passed on March 31, it authorized the Royal Navy to blockade Boston Harbor beginning June 1. Parliament claimed that business could no longer be properly conducted in the region if they were in danger of being raided by protesters like the tea ships were during the Boston Tea Party. Parliament declared that the harbor would be closed indefinitely until the province had paid for the £10,000 (about $1.7 million today) of tea destroyed in the Tea Party and the king had ascertained that order had been restored and that Bostonians could respect British law. The blockade forbade any exports out of Massachusetts, whether to another colony or a foreign country. The only imports allowed were necessary goods like fuel and wheat. Because Boston was by far the largest city in Massachusetts, and Boston was primarily a port city, this act was a major threat to the province's economy. The colonists of course objected to this, as well as the fact that only a few dozen men perpetrated the Tea Party in the first place, and all of Boston suffered for it, was unfair.

2) Massachusetts Governing Act: Passed on May 20, it declared Massachusetts to be under mob rule and therefore revoked the provincial charter. Nearly all elected positions in the provincial government were now to be appointed by Parliament, the king, or the governor, who was royally appointed himself. For example, the previously popularly-elected Massachusetts Council become entirely royally appointed. The governor could choose judges and county sheriffs without the Council's approval. Those county sheriffs could in turn select jurors. Since sheriffs made arrests and chose who would decide the accused's verdict, Massachusett's justice system became far less impartial and far more under the sheriffs' influences. Town meetings were also limited to just one a year, rendering them effectively useless. Combined with the several thousand British troops in Boston, the Province of Massachusetts had essentially come under the direct rule of Great Britain, and colonists had lost their autonomy.

3) Administration of Justice Act: Passed on May 20, it allowed royal officials accused of crimes to be tried in Great Britain if the governor decided that they could not obtain a fair trial in Massachusetts. However, since the suspected crime was committed in Massachusetts, all witnesses would have to be transported to Great Britain for the trial as well. Though the law required these witnesses be reimbursed for their travel expenses, they would still be missing work, and therefore money, while they were away, which would not be reimbursed. Because transatlantic voyages lasted over a month and the trial would likely last at least a few weeks, the witnesses could be away for a while. Many could not afford to attend these trials. But more than that, colonists objected to what they saw as their rights being violated. The Magna Carta guaranteed British subjects the right to a trial by a jury of their peers, which the accused would not be getting. They also feared that ironically to the written intent of the law, the trials in Great Britain would be biased in favor of the accused, allowing them to get away with any crime. George Washington went as far as to call it the "Murder Act." Colonists also saw the law as unnecessary, believing the British soldiers on trial for the Boston Massacre three years prior received a fair trial (most were acquitted entirely), so there was no need for the change in location.

4) Quartering Act: Passed on June 2, it allowed for the quartering of soldiers in civilian areas. Parliament had already passed a Quartering Act in 1765 that allowed soldiers to be quartered in various public and private buildings (though never private residencies) and required colonists to pay for their supplies. However, most colonies were uncooperative, and found ways to avoid following the intent of the law. The new Quartering Act allowed the governor to force compliance, but in return dropped the requirement of footing the bill for supplying the soldiers. Like the last Quartering Act but unlike the rest of the Intolerable Acts, this applied to all the colonies, not just Massachusetts. Like last time, the colonists objected to having to quarter soldiers in peacetime where they could be constantly threatened.

5) Quebec Act: Passed on June 22, it was not created in direct response to the Boston Tea Party, but came around the same time and caused a similar level of outrage in the colonies, so it is sometimes included in the Intolerable Acts. It dramatically expanded the border of Quebec to include the entire Ohio River Valley, directly west of the Thirteen Colonies. This land was highly sought after; many of the colonists fought for it in the French and Indian War, but had been prohibited from settling there by the Royal Proclamation of 1763. Now, not only would they not get any of it for certain, but it was being given to Quebec, inhabited by the very French settlers they fought against for it. Furthermore, the law legalized the practice of Catholicism, the dominant religion amongst French Canadiens. Most of the Thirteen Colonies were Protestant, especially Massachusetts, which was one of the largest and most outspoken of the colonies. They vehemontly opposed Catholicism, and hated that it was being allowed right on their front door. The royal governor and Crown were given complete control over Quebec, and a union of British and French civil law were implemented, which ended up excluding trial by jury. The colonists had already been beginning to believe Great Britain was no longer respecting the colony's self-determination or their right to trial by jury, and the Quebec Act seemed to confirm their suspicions. They feared that they all would soon end up like Quebec, full of Catholics and ruled without their consent.

Parliament, who had named these laws the Coercive Acts, intended for them to gain better control over the rebellious Massachusetts and break its spirit. Each act was meant to damage life in some way: the Boston Port Act ruined the economy and increased unemployment, the Massachusetts Governing Act essentially removed representative government, the Administration of Justice Act removed the right to a fair trial, and the Quartering Act provided a thinly veiled threat if the province didn't comply. The Quebec Act challenged the notion amongst the colonists that the French and Indian War, which saw thousands of colonists' deaths, was fought for Protestantism and popular sovereignty.

It is at this point unsurprising that the colonies, Massachusetts especially, did not react well to these. They called them the Intolerable Acts, and thought that these made  the Stamp Act and Townshend Acts look trivial. They decided to formalize the Committees of Correspondence as the Continental Congress, composed of delegates selected by each colonial legislature. This Congress would meet up in one location, decide a plan of action, and report back to their respective colonies. The Congress resolved to send a petition directly to the king and establish a large-scale boycott of British goods.

The Intolerable Acts caused a dramatic change in the colonies. While few were fans of the tea tax and Tea Act, many of even the most outspoken colonial Whigs, like George Washington, questioned the Boston Tea Party as perhaps going too far. But the Intolerable Acts were seen as a gross overreaction and a direct affront to the liberty of the inhabitants of Massachusetts, and the other colonists feared that Great Britain was willing and able to subject them to the same punishments. 

The show of solidarity was widespread. On May 23, the Sons of Liberty in Chestertown, Maryland claimed it was illegal to buy, sell, or drink English tea, and supposedly conducted their own Tea Party protest. On July 4, Orangetown, New York proclaimed that they would boycott British goods until the acts were repealed.  The Virginia House of Burgesses declared a day of "fasting, humiliation, and prayer" to show support for Massachusetts. When Lord Dunmore dissolved the legislature in retaliation, they met up in Alexandria. There, on July 5, George Washington and others drafted the Fairfax Resolves, covered similar ground to the above, but also condemned the slave trade and urged for it to be ended. Rowan County, North Carolina passed a similar resolve to Fairfax on August 8. In Suffolk County, Massachusetts, committees of correspondence urged people not to pay taxes until their charter was restored, boycott British goods, and raise a militia. This resolve would be delivered by Paul Revere to the Continental Congress, where it was endorsed on September 17. On November 5, soldiers at Fort Gower on the Ohio River endorsed the Congress's statements. They wrote that "we will exert every power within us for the defence of American liberty," the first of these resolves to directly threaten rebellion. On January 20, 1775, Fincastle County, Virginia declared that "we are deliberately and resolutely determined never to surrender [our rights] to any power upon earth, but at the expense of our lives." Harford County, Maryland passed the last of these pre-war declarations on March 22, promising to "mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our Fortunes, and our sacred Honor."  Great Britain had not expected the level of unity and coordination amongst the colonies, even more so than during the Stamp Act protests. Colonists from as far away as Georgia sent supplies to Massachusetts to compensate them for their closed port. But this time, Parliament refused to back down. They were determined to get the colonies under control once and for all.

With the passage of these acts, tension between Great Britain and the Thirteen Colonies were at an all-time high. Colonists, feeling threatened by these acts, began stockpiling weapons en masse. Less than a year after the Intolerable Acts were passed, the colonists and British troops would begin skirmishes, which soon turned into a full-blown war.


Title: Lord Dunmore's War
Description: Lord Dunmore's War was a conflict between Virginian settlers and Shawnee and Mingo tribesmen. The war was named after Virginia Governor John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore, who convinced the Virginia House of Burgesses to declare war with the Native Americans to push them out of the upper Ohio Valley. The most powerful tribe in the region was the Iroquois Confederacy, who had long since held claim to the land south of the Ohio River, though other tribes claimed the land as well. In 1768, British officials had signed the Treaty of Fort Stanwix with the Iroquois Confederacy, which relinquished the tribe's claims to the land.

Following the treaty, Virginian settlers began pushing west, though numerous other powerful tribes in the region, most notably the Shawnee, refused to recognize the treaty and maintained their claims. One such settling party was led by James Boone, the 16-year-old son of hunter Daniel Boone, which on October 9, 1773, was attacked by a force of allied Indians. Boone and Henry Russell, another teenager, were tortured to death as a message against Virginian settlement west. Though attempts were made by Captain Micheal Cresap, leader of the settlers in Ohio, to keep the peace, too many settlers wanted war. It was declared on April 26, 1774, with fighting beginning at Pipe Creek the next day.

On April 30, a group of settlers brutally attacked defenseless relatives of the Mingo leader Logan in an event known as the Yellow Creek Massacre. Lord Dunmore organized a militia force, hoping that the war would divert Virginians' attention away from the protests in New England. Colonel Andrew Lewis established Point Pleasant on October 6 and was ambushed there by warriors led by Chief Cornstalk four days later. The Native American Ohio Confederate forces were defeated, and as Dunmore's forces pushed deeper into their territory peace negotiations opened. The Treaty of Camp Charlotte was signed on October 18, which ended the conflict between the Virginians and the Shawnee. The Shawnee also had to agree to stop hunting south of Ohio and harassing white settlers in the area. However, the Mingo refused to sign the treaty, leading Major William Crawford to destroy their nearby village of Seekunk. The Mingo surrendered soon after. However, peace did not last, with the Shawnee attacking Virginian settlers as early as March 1775. Dunmore's hopes of distracting the Virginians were not fulfilled, with the colonists even declaring the willingness to use force to defend their rights if necessary.


Title: Rhode Island bans importation of slaves
Description: 


Title: First Continental Congress
Description: The First Continental Congress was a meeting of delegates from twelve American colonies to discuss a coordinated reaction to the Intolerable Acts. These were a series of four acts passed by Parliament and King George III designed to punish Boston and Massachusetts at large for the Boston Tea Party, which the British viewed as unjustified destruction of property and a grave insult to the British Empire. In turn, colonists saw the Intolerable Acts as, well, intolerable. Though most of the acts only affected Massachusetts, the other colonies felt solidarity with whom they saw as fellow British subjects being deprived of their rights. Plus, they feared that if they did not act now, they might share a similar fate to Massachusetts. By the late spring of 1774, nine colonies, represented by their legislatures or committees of correspondence, called for a continental congress to be convened, a call led by the Virginia Committee of Correspondence. Georgia was the only colony of the thirteen that would eventually secede that did not attend. The Loyalist cause was stronger there, as it was still a young colony compared to the other twelve, and so more dependent on British assistance, especially with constant threats of fighting with Indians on the frontier and in neighboring Florida.

Fifty-six delegates attended, convening in Carpenter's Hall in Philadelphia on September 5. Prominent members included John Adams and Samuel Adams of Massachusetts, Roger Sherman of Connecticut, John Jay of New York, John Dickinson of Pennsylvania, Patrick Henry, Richard Henry Lee, Peyton Randolph, and George Washington of Virginia, and John Rutledge of South Carolina. The Congress elected Randolph as president and Charles Thomson as secretary. As previously mentioned, the delegates were there to discuss a planned reaction to the Intolerable Acts. Conservatives like John Jay, Joseph Galloway, John Dickinson, and Edward Rutledge wanted to form policies to pressure Parliament into repealing the punitive measures. More radical members like Henry, Sherman, and the Adamses wanted to draft a declaration of rights of the colonists to end parliamentary abuse of those rights. Henry went as far as to call for a new, continental government to be formed, implying the colonies' independence. Galloway countered by proposing a pan-colonial government that Great Britain would require consent from to pass certain measures, instead of full independence. It would have consisted of a President-General appointed by the Crown and delegates appointed by colonial legislatures. This idea was remarkably similar to Benjamin Franklin's proposal in the Albany Convention twenty years prior.

Ultimately, neither proposal won out. Instead, the Congress endorsed the Suffolk Resolves, a declaration made by the Committees of Correspondence meeting in Suffolk County, MA. It called on citizens of Massachusetts to disregard the Massachusetts Governing Act, and until it was repealed, boycott British imports and products, reduce exports to Great Britain, refuse to pay taxes, and even form a now-illegal government and raise a militia. The Resolves were passed on September 9, and Paul Revere had delivered a copy of them to the Continental Congress a few days later, where it was endorsed on September 17 as a show of solidarity.

Next, the Congress began drafting the Continental Association. This was a plan to end British imports into the colonies by December 1774 and end exporting to Great Britain by September 1775.


Title: Massachusetts Provincial Congress
Description: 


Title: Declaration and Resolves
Description: A document written by the First Continental Congress in protest of the Intolerable Acts. In a manner similar to the Declaration of Rights and Grievances issued nine years prior by the First Continental Congress' predecessor, the Stamp Act Congress, it declared the colony's contempt towards the Intolerable Acts. It outlined the rights a British subject ought to enjoy, and claimed the acts infringed on those rights. It also suggested that neither the king nor Parliament had the authority to do so, because they did not truly represent the interests of the colonists. While King George recognized this as further evidence of the colonists' dislike of the punitive measures in Massachusetts, he refused to yield, stressing political unity over the happiness of the colonists. With a clear outline of the wrongdoings of the British government, more people began to seek independence from the mother country.


Title: Continental Association
Description: A system drafted by the First Continental Congress in an attempt to boycott British goods in protest of the Intolerable Acts. It began with a profession of loyalty to the Crown, signifying that Americans were not yet ready to divorce from Great Britain. It proposed an immediate and total ban of British tea, and a ban on the importation or consumption of any goods (including slaves) from Britain, Ireland, or the British West Indies, which took effect on December 1. It threatened the cessation of exportation of goods to said locations if the Intolerable Acts were not repealed by September 10, 1775. Local committees would be established to monitor these events, and anyone caught defying the boycott would be condemned in print and labeled as an enemy of the people. Furthermore, any colony not complying with the Association would be prohibited from trading with any other colony. The boycott was successful, with imports from the blacklisted countries dropping to 3% of what they were the year before. In response, Great Britain blocked the colonies from trading with anyone but the mother country or its other colonies, as well as banning them from the North Atlantic fishing areas. The outbreak of the Revolutionary War in April 1775 effectively led to the discontinuation of the Association. It was the largest coordinated effort between the colonies up to that point, as the thirteen had been mostly divided since their inception.

Text: https://bit.ly/2Um9DgE


Title: Letters to the inhabitants of Canada
Description: 


Title: Petition to the King
Description: A petition sent to King George III of Great Britain requesting the repeal of the 1774 Intolerable Acts. It was written by an appointed committee consisting of Richard Henry Lee (the chair), John Adams, Patrick Henry, Thomas Johnson, and John Rutledge. They began writing the draft on October 1 and was ratified by Congress on the 25th after some amendments. It was signed by 51 of the 56 Congressional delegates and sent to London, arriving on November 14. It was examined by the House of Commons on January 19 of the next year, where it was mostly disregarded and not formally replied to. The Petition showed that even though the colonists were becoming increasingly upset with the actions of the British government, they still wished to remain loyal to the Crown as late as October 1774.


Title: <i>A Full Vindication of the Measures of Congress</i>
Description: 


Title: <i>The Farmer Refuted</i>
Description: 


Title: Parliament declares Massachusetts to be in a state of rebellion
Description: 


Title: Edmund Burke coins the term "salutary neglect"
Description: 


Title: Patrick Henry's "Give me liberty, or give me death!" speech
Description: A speech given by Patrick Henry at St. John's Church in Richmond, Virginia.

Full Text
https://bit.ly/2xtfXa6


Title: Restraining Act
Description: 


Title: Pennsylvania Abolition Society founded
Description: 


Title: <b>American Revolutionary War</b>
Description: 


Title: <b>Battles of Lexington and Concord</b>
Description: Start of the Revolutionary War. British soldiers found out that colonists were stockpiling ammunition for a revolution in Concord, so they came to put it down. Soldiers were intercepted at Lexington, as riders like Paul Revere and Samuel Prescott had forewarned the Patriots of the British arrival. It is unknown which side fired the first shot, but it was nicknamed "the shot heard round the world," and marked the beginning of the American Revolutionary War. The militia was outnumbered at Lexington, forcing them to retreat to Concord, where they received a large number of reinforcements. At Concord, the rebels were the ones with superior numbers, and managed to chase the British troops out of the city. The British retreated to Boston, being harassed by militiamen on they way back. The defeat was humiliating for the British, as they had one of, if not the strongest and best-trained army in the world, and yet they lost to poorly trained militiamen.

In response, county governments once again began passing resolves declaring their resistance. On May 31, 1775, Mecklenburg County, North Carolina declared all laws passed by the king or Parliament to be void. On June 20, Cumberland County, North Carolina announced that they would be ready to "sacrifice our lives and fortunes to secure [the country's] freedom and safety." On August 14, Tryon County, North Carolina promised similar resistance against British injustice.


On April 14, Major General Thomas Gage, Commander of the British Army in North America, was instructed to disarm the rebels in Massachusetts and arrest their leaders. The next day, he heard from a spy that the extralegal Continental Congress, composed of official delegates from twelve colonies, was considering raising an army of nearly 20,000 soldiers. Gage, who was based in Boston, took off to the countryside to gather information on the morning of April 18. He took a team of 20 patrolmen, who visited nearby towns and asked for the whereabouts of John Hancock and Samuel Adams, known to be strong Patriots. The townspeople, afraid they were coming to arrest the two leaders, alerted their militias. That afternoon, Gage ordered Lt. Colonel Francis Smith to destroy the weapons stockpile at Concord, a town northwest of Boston, but not to arrest the rebel leaders or destroy any private property, as doing so May have made matters worse. 

Gage attempted to keep the order secret, even instructing Smith not to open them until he was already on his way. The rebels still found out well in advance, possibly from Gage's New Jersey-born wife, Margaret, a colonial sympathizer and friend of Joseph Warren, a Patriot. However he found out, on the night of April 18, Warren told Paul Revere and William Dawes, some of the only Patriots that had not fled Boston, that British were planning to March on Concord, traveling through the town of Lexington on the way, on April 19. Revere quickly rode out from Boston, warning every Patriot he came across, some of whom set out to do the same. Around midnight, he arrived in Lexington and met up with Dawes. They met up with Samuel Adams and John Hancock, who were hiding out for the night in Rev. Jonas Clarke's house, a relative of Hancock. They determined that the force heading out of Boston was too large for the simple task of arresting Adams and Hancock, which they had previously thought was their goal. They believed their true target to be the weapons stockpile at Concord, which was also where the extralegal Massachusetts Provincial Congress happened to be. The colonists had developed a system of bells, lanterns, drums, and other such instruments to quickly deliver messages across towns, originally devised for warning of Indian raids. Several days prior, before coming to Lexington, Revere had instructed Patriot Robert Newman to alert Charlestown in the event of a British movement from Boston. He told Newman to light one lantern in the steeple of his church if the soldiers were coming by land, or two if by the Charles River. They used a similar setup to notify towns all across the route from Boston to Concord. Revere and Dawes joined up with Samuel Prescott, a physician and fellow Patriot, and set out to warn Concord in person. While passing through Lincoln, a town between Lexington and Concord, they were found and detained by a British patrol at a checkpoint. Dawes and Prescott managed to escape, but Dawes fell off his horse and did not finish the journey that night. The patrol took Revere and headed back towards Lexington, questioning him on the way. Revere warned them they would be greeted by a large and angry militia, so the patrol decided to confiscate his horse, let him and their other captives go, and warn their commanders instead. Revere walked to Jonas Clarke's house and helped Samuel Adams, John Hancock and Hancock's family escape.

On April 19, at about 3 am, 700 British regulars were ready to leave Boston for Concord, arriving at Lexington by dawn. They found about 80 militiamen there, headed by Captain John Parker, a French and Indian War veteran. Parker and the rest of the Patriots knew that Concord would be safe, as they would already have hidden the munitions. The British had actually visited Concord several times before for the same reason and had found nothing. As such, there was no point in shooting at the much larger British force unless they attacked first. Supposedly, Parker told the militia to "Stand your ground; don't fire unless fired upon, but if they meant to have a war, let it begin here." The British surrounded the militiamen, and Major John Pitcairn ordered them to disperse. The situation was becoming heated, and people all around were yelling. Parker then told his men to leave as well, but a bout with tuberculosis had weakened his voice, and combined with the shouting many did not hear him. Amidst the confusion, someone fired the first shot, later nicknamed the "shot heard 'round the world." The shooter's identity varies across accounts; theories include a militiaman, a soldier, an onlooker, or several simultaneous shots. In any case, the regulars began firing intermittently on the miltia, despite not having orders to do so. Most militiamen fled, being unable to prepare their rifles to shoot back. The regulars then charged with bayonets. In the end, eight Lexington men died, and one regular was wounded in the thigh. Despite being characterized as a battle, the "Battle of Lexington" was really more of a scuffle, though it was the first in the long war to come.



Deaths:
39 Patriot militiamen
73 British troops


Title: Capture of Fort Ticonderoga
Description: The Green Mountain Boys led by Ethan Allen, along with a small force of American militiamen led by Benedict Arnold, captured British Fort Ticonderoga in northern NY, a vital communications and supply point connecting Canada with New York. It also had lots of guns and ammunition for the Patriots to use. They attacked at night, while the British were asleep and off-guard, causing them to surrender with practically no resistance. Henry Knox (future Secretary of War under George Washington) would later take these weapons and use oxen to drag them through the snow all the way to Boston.


Title: Second Continental Congress
Description: 


Title: 4500 British reinforcements arrive in Boston
Description: 


Title: Continental Army established
Description: 


Title: <b>Battle of Bunker Hill</b>
Description: On June 13, following intelligence that the British would try to take Boston Harbor, Congress sent 1200 troops to defend Bunker Hill and nearby Breed's Hill. On June 17, the British mounted an assault against the militia, charging three times to take the hills. The militia repelled them the first two times, but ran out of ammunition by the third attempt. The Patriot soldiers were famously ordered "Don't fire until you see the whites of their eyes" in order to increase accuracy to save ammunition. However, this was still not enough, and the Americans were forced to retreat. While the British were victorious in the battle, they suffered more casualties and learned that the untrained American militia could face off successfully against well-organized armies.

Deaths:
115 Patriot militiamen
226 British soldiers/officers


Title: George Washington becomes commander-in-chief of the Continental Army
Description: 


Title: Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms
Description: A document written by Congressman John Dickinson (who borrowed much of the text from Thomas Jefferson) that explained the reasoning behind the American Revolutionary War. Specifically, it explained that the colonists found the Intolerable Acts, the taxes, and the Declaratory Act as examples of Great Britain attempting to unconstitutionally assert its dominance over the colonies. It assured the British that the colonists did not seek independence, and that they would end their rebellion if the oppression would stop. However, the document was published two days after the Declaration of Independence, and four days after the Lee Resolution, meaning that there would be no returning to the British Empire.

Text: https://bit.ly/2FtSYzA


Title: Olive Branch Petition
Description: Soon after the war broke out, most Congressmen hoped to repair relations with Great Britain, instead of declaring independence. So in a last-ditch attempt to end the war before it got out of hand, Congress drafted the Olive Branch Petition, asking King George III to get rid of the taxes the colonists didn't like and improve relations. However, King George didn't even read it, declaring the colonists to be traitors, and the war continued.

Text: https://bit.ly/2UfIWdo


Title: Congress rejects Conciliatory Resolution
Description: 


Title: Proclamation of Rebellion
Description: 


Title: Prohibitory Act
Description: 


Title: William Howe becomes commander-in-chief of the British Army in North America
Description: 


Title: Lord Dunmore's Proclamation
Description: A decree signed by John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore, royal governor of the British Colony of Virginia. It promised emancipation to any American slaves willing to run away and join the British Army. 80,000 to 100,000 slaves ran away from their masters (including both Patriots and Loyalists), including 17 of Washington's own over the length of the war. American reactions were mixed; Virginia declared on December 14 that runaway slaves would be immediately executed, while General Washington issued a counter to the proclamation, promising freedom to any slaves that enlisted in the Continental Army or state militias. These slaves would serve in racially integrated units, which would not be seen again in America for over 150 years. Rhode Island, with the highest proportion of slaves in its population in New England, formed a black regiment giving the promise of freedom. The South, minus South Carolina and Georgia, followed suit, giving freedom to many blacks after the war (though not all).


Title: Colonial population exceeds 2.5 million
Description: 


Title: John Adams' <i>Thoughts on Government</i>
Description: A paper written by John Adams in which he outlines how he thinks state governments ought to be structured. He explained the benefits of a three-branch system of government, consisting of a legislative, executive, and judicial branch, all with checks and balances over each other. He also expressed the importance of a bicameral legislature. One example he examined was the Constitution of Pennsylvania, whose legislature was unicameral. The state claimed that its people had one set of interests, but Adams disagreed, saying that having two houses was the best solution to the natural divide between the aristocracy (represented in the upper house) and the ordinary people (who would occupy the lower). A powerful governor and court system would also be necessary to balance out the powers of the legislature. Every state but Pennsylvania, Vermont, and Georgia established a bicameral legislature, but only Massachusetts gave their governor veto power, as most of the country had bad experiences with royally appointed governors abusing their power over the elected assemblies.

Text: https://bit.ly/2UeTZUp


Title: <b>Thomas Paine's <i>Common Sense</i></b>
Description: <i>Common Sense</i> was a pamphlet written by Thomas Paine advocating for independence from Great Britain. Paine wrote about the flaws in a monarchical government, complained that the English constitution was borne out of tyrannies of the king and aristocracy, and affirmed that honesty and good moral character is worth more than "crowned ruffians." Paine assured readers that if they reMained colonies, their economy would be forever tied down by the Navigation Acts, but could flourish on its own. Americans could stay out of the many wars fought by Great Britain against other European powers, and most grandiosely of all, become a haven for freedom, a savior of mankind.

It was written in layman's terms, and although not everyone could read, those who could read it to everyone else. <i>Common Sense</i> was directed towards everybody, not just the elite, in an effort to include the number of people thinking about politics. It soon became the most widely read book in America (percentage-wise) and sold more than 150,000 copies. It dramatically changed how Americans saw the war, as, before the book, most hoped to eventually repair relations with Great Britain. Instead, they desired to form a new republic, and less than five months later the Declaration of Independence was ratified.

Full Text: https://bit.ly/2KIi9lj


Title: Adam Smith's <i>The Wealth of Nations</i>
Description: <i>An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations</i> was a book written by Adam Smith in which he examined what makes nations prosperous. In it, he discredits the prevailing economic theory of mercantilism. Under this system, countries operated under the belief that there was a finite amount of wealth in the world, and so the more prosperous one's neighbors were, the worse off one's own country was. Wealth was amassed by minimizing imports and maximizing exports, as well as frequent piracy. Smith criticizes mercantilism for equating precious metals like gold and silver with wealth, instead arguing that a nation's wealth is better measured by the amount of goods and services it can output. This was the advent of the concept of gross domestic product (GDP), which is still used today to evaluate the prosperity of a country. He argues that gold and silver should not be hoarded, but kept in circulation, as that would keep more money flowing throughout the economy, which leads to more production, which leads to more wealth. Smith also advocated for little government intervention into the economy, claiming that in a totally free market, would be self-regulating. This idea was named "the invisible hand of the free market" and is another central idea to capitalism, the economic system that Smith vouches for in his book. Mercantilism soon fell out of favor among most countries and would adopt capitalism in its place, including the United States, a country that would become its primary defender during the Cold War.


Title: South Carolina adopts a constitution for an independent state
Description: 


Title: Patriot Capture of Boston
Description: Using the cannons received from Fort Ticonderoga, Washington sent them and his troops to Dorchester Heights, an area near one of the British fortifications near Boston. Upon daybreak, the British noticed the cannons and immediately surrendered, as they had been caught in a compromising situation. The British were forced to abandon the city, with 9000 troops and 2000 loyalists sailing away.


Title: Halifax Resolves
Description: 


Title: May 15 Preamble
Description: 


Title: Virginia Declaration of Rights
Description: 


Title: Lee Resolution
Description: A resolution approved by the Continental Congress that declared the secession of the rebellious states from Great Britain. Named after Virginia Burgess Richard Henry Lee, who proposed the document to Congress, it was approved by every rebellious colony but New York, whose delegates had not yet been instructed by their state governments on how to vote (they voted to join the new states on July 9). Before the voting, Congress established three committees in anticipation of the resolution passing: one to write a formal declaration of independence, another to create a frame of government for the new country, and the last to draft a model treaty for foreign relations. The Declaration of Independence would be signed on July 4, two days after Congress decided to secede.

Text: https://bit.ly/2WhTC8O


Title: <b>Declaration of Independence signed</b>
Description: A document declaring the rebellious states to become a nation independent of Great Britain named the United States of America. It was written by Thomas Jefferson and signed by the 13 states on July 4. The declaration claimed that "all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness," and continued with a list of ways in which Congress felt King George III of Great Britain had infringed upon those rights, how the American people had continuously protested against those infringements, and how they had been ignored. Jefferson had originally included a section condemning slavery and criticizing Great Britain for allowing it to flourish, but it was removed at South Carolina's and Georgia's urging. July 4 is celebrated as Independence Day in the US.

Full Text: https://bit.ly/1gEm0L5


Title: Liberty Bell rung
Description: Upon hearing the news of the Second Continental Congress approving the Declaration of Independence, the bell was run to celebrate. It is unclear when the bell was cracked, with legend dating back to 1824. The earliest recorded date of its crack was 1846.


Title: Battle of Long Island
Description: The first major battle after the Declaration of Independence. After moving his army to New York, Washington encountered a new shipment of 25,000 British troops commanded by British General William Howe. They set up at Staten Island, and sent a secret force behind the American troops. While the American forces were distracted with the decoy army, the secret one came in from the back and hit them hard. A decisive British victory, it forced Washington to retreat to Brooklyn Heights.

Deaths:
300 American militiamen
64 British troops


Title: World's first submarine attack
Description: 


Title: New nation named "the United States of America"
Description: 


Title: British-American peace conference on Staten Island
Description: 


Title: Nathan Hale executed
Description: 


Title: Model Treaty
Description: A guide for future treaties established by a committee appointed by Congress. The committee consisted of John Adams, John Dickinson, Benjamin Franklin, Benjamin Harrison and Robert Morris, and was created on June 12. The Model Treaty included the provisions of free ports for free goods, freedom of trade for neutrals, and an agreed list of contraband. It was approved on September 24, and was taken by Franklin to negotiate with France the next day.


Title: Phi Beta Kappa founded
Description: 


Title: Battle of Trenton
Description: In order to restore faith in the revolution, Washington planned an assault on a group of Hessian mercenaries (hired by the British) at Trenton, NJ. It was on Christmas Eve in the winter at night, so the Hessians did not expect an attack. Washington and his troops sailed across the Delaware River and ambushed the Hessians at Trenton. The Hessians surrendered, a small but decisive victory for the Americans.

Casualties:
2 Americans died (from exposure)
22 Hessians killed
900 Hessians captured


Title: Vermont Republic founded
Description: In 1777, a government controlled the region of Vermont that was separate from the US, Great Britain, France, or any other country. After the end of the French and Indian War, there were overlapping land claims made by both the New York and New Hampshire colonies. In response, an independent government was established declaring the region to be called the Republic of New Connecticut. They later changed the name to Vermont, based of the French name for the Green Mountain Boys, a militia from Vermont that fought for the Americans in the Revolutionary War. Their constitution banned slavery, and was based off the radical constitution of Pennsylvania. In 1781, the US announced it would recognize or annex Vermont in return for the cession of some land claims. They accepted, and the Republic of Vermont lasted for 10 more years until it was admitted as the free state counterpart to Kentucky to maintain the power balance.


Title: Flag Resolution
Description: Congress passed the Flag Resolution, which declares that the US flag was to be composed of 13 stripes alternating red and white, with 13 white stars on a blue background. It was nicknamed the Betsy Ross flag, though there is no evidence indicating that it was Betsy Ross who designed it.


Title: Vermont bans slavery
Description: 


Title: Siege of Fort Ticonderoga
Description: 


Title: Lafayette accepted as a US major general
Description: 


Title: Battle of Brandywine
Description: A battle between Washington's and Howe's troops for control of the US capital of Philadelphia. Howe once again used his strategy of distracting the American troops with a decoy army and attacking from behind. Washington suffered a crushing defeat, allowing the British to take control of Philadelphia by September 26.

Casualties:
1399 American militiamen
-300 killed
-600 wounded
-400 captured

587 British troops
-93 killed
-488 wounded
-6 missing


Title: British Capture of Philadelphia
Description: The end of the Philadelphia Campaign, in which General Howe seeked to capture the city of Philadelphia. It was an enticing target, being the US capital, the largest English North American city, and contained numerous Loyalists, just to name a few reasons. After Howe's victory at Brandywine, he moved on Philadelphia and captured it. Congress hid out at Lancaster, PA during the occupation. A day later, they moved west and relocated at York, PA on September 30. They relocated back to Philadelphia in June 1778, when the city was recaptured by the Americans.


Title: Battle of Cowpens
Description: A US-Great Britain battle in the South for control of key areas in South Carolina. After General Gates was defeated at the Battle of Camden, Washington sent General Nathaniel Greene to fight Lord Cornwallis. Greene managed to divide Cornwallis' army in two, one half led by Colonel Sir Banastre Tarleton, who engaged American General Daniel Morgan. Morgan set up a defensive position at the Broad River, correctly predicting that the aggressive Tarleton would launch a simple head-on assault. Tarleton suffered a crushing defeat.

Casualties:
25 American troops killed
124 American troops wounded
110 British troops killed
229 British troops wounded
829 British troops captured/missing


Title: <b>Battle of Saratoga</b>
Description: American troops led by General Benedict Arnold crushed British General Burgoyne's troops in Saratoga, NY. It represented a turning point in the Revolutionary War, and eventually encouraged France to join the Americans in the fight.

Casualties:
90 Americans killed
240 Americans wounded
440 British & allies killed
695 British & allies wounded
6222 British & allies captured


Title: Articles of Confederation written
Description: The Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union was the first draft for an official government of the US, coming 15 months after the new nation declared independence. It proposed a confederation of the 13 states, each with their own, mostly autonomous government. They would be united by a weak central government, similar to the Second Continental Congress. The Articles placed great emphasis on decentralized power, as the American Revolution was being fought because of a tyrannical authoritarian, something the Americans wished to avoid a repetition of. The Continental Congress was renamed to the Congress of the Confederation, but most used its old name, as the Articles changed very little of Congress' powers or responsibilities. The Articles were largely written in order to justify the actions of Congress, as when they were formed they had no legal authority to do anything, and yet they established a military, negotiated with foreign countries, issued paper currency, imposed trade restrictions, and other functions of a government. On June 12, 1776, Congress appointed a special council of 13 to create a written constitution to act as a guide for the powers of the government. The first draft was finished within a month, which was sent to Congress for revision. The final draft was approved for ratification by Congress on November 15, 1777. It consisted of a preamble, 13 articles, and a conclusion. The articles consisted of the following:

-names the confederation "The United States of America"
-promises sovereignty to each state, with the exception of the powers granted to Congress
-states the purpose of the confederation to be to protect each other
-grants people the right to move freely between states and equal rights between states
-grants each state 2-7 Congressmen appointed by state legislatures, who collectively get one vote.
-grants Congress the exclusive right to declare war and conduct foreign political and commercial relations
-state legislatures assign ranks of colonel and below to soldiers in wartime
-each state contributes to the federal budget, proportional to the amount of money each has
-grants Congress certain powers, including making treaties and alliances, determining war and peace, establishing courts, and minting coins. Congress serves as the highest court to resolve interstate disputes. Such a court is composed of appointed commissioners. Congress regulates the post office and the military, including appointing military officers. Congress can request payment or supplies from states. Congress cannot declare wars, make treaties or alliances, or appoint a commander-in-chief without the permission of nine states.
-most powers of Congress can be exercised by states when nine of them agree when Congress is in session
-Quebec will be allowed into the confederation if they wish; otherwise, nine states must grant consent to admit new states
-the confederation accepts the Second Continental Congress' war debt
-the government is permanent and can only be altered with the permission of Congress and every state legislature

However, from their inception the Articles were fatally flawed. Congress had essentially no power without the consent of states. Many soldiers during the war defected because of a lack of pay, and Congress had no authority to force the states to pay them. Congress could also not force delegates to show up, leaving little accomplished in a timely matter. For this reason, the signing of the Treaty of Paris was delayed by several months due to a lack of delegates showing up. The Articles were ratified in 1781, and continued to serve as the country's constitution until 1788.


Full Text
https://bit.ly/1nMGWGa


Title: France recognizes US independence
Description: 


Title: First national Thanksgiving
Description: 


Title: 1777-78 Valley Forge winter
Description: A harsh winter set in at the encampment of Valley Forge, where Washington's main troops were stationed. A couple thousand died from disease, while there was much starvation, lack of pay, and some mutiny. During the winter, a Prussian military expert named Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben hired by Ben Franklin showed up and gave the troops a proper European military training, allowing the troops to take on the British Army more effectively by the end of the winter.


Title: Taxation of Colonies Act
Description: 


Title: <b>French Treaty of Alliance, and of Amity and Commerce</b>
Description: An alliance between France and the US, with the former agreeing to assist the latter in their fight for independence from Great Britain. France was originally neutral in the conflict. On the one hand, they still resented the British for their recent defeat in the Seven Years' War, and were eager to enact their revenge. However, that same war left them broke, leaving them cautious to engage in another war with the country that they were not sure they could win. The Battle of Saratoga in 1777 tipped the scales in the US' favor, proving to the French that the fledgling nation had a chance at winning. Negotiations were opened between the two countries, with the US using their Model Treaty to draft an agreement. The nations signed two treaties in tandem: the Treaty of Alliance, in which they agreed to defend each other from British aggression, and the Treaty of Amity and Commerce, which was a commercial alliance. The French provided much-needed support to the Americas, helping them to win the War of Independence. It was ratified by the US on May 4, and by France on July 16.


Title: Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben arrives in Valley Forge
Description: 


Title: Congress ratifies the Treaty of Alliance and the Treaty of Amity and Commerce
Description: 


Title: Battle of Monmouth
Description: After France joined the Revolutionary War, British General Henry Clinton was ordered to abandon Philadelphia and consolidate his forces at New York. While Arnold was sent to retake the city, Washington followed Clinton's army at attacked at Monmouth Courthouse, NJ. Under extreme heat, the two sides fought, with heatstroke claiming more lives than musket fire. The Americans, under command of General Charles Lee, retreated until met by Washington, who proceeded to fire Lee and and continued fighting. The battle eventually ended in a draw.

Casualties:
362-500 American troops killed, captured, or wounded
65-304 British troops killed
170-770 British troops wounded
60 British troops captured


Title: Treaty of Fort Pitt
Description: 


Title: First federal budget
Description: 


Title: Surrender of Henry Hamilton
Description: 


Title: Spain joins the US in the war
Description: Spain allied itself with the US and French to fight Great Britain, with the main goal of taking Gibraltar.


Title: Colonial population exceeds 2.75 million
Description: Colonial population is 2,780,369


Title: The Court of Appeals in Cases of Capture
Description: The Court of Appeals in Cases of Capture was the first federal court in the US and was established by Congress. It acted as a court of appeals over disputes over captured property, with Congress handing over its jurisdiction to the Court. In May, Congress transferred all of its cases over to the Court, and in June 1786, it granted it the right to demand rehearings and new trials. It was composed of three judges and heard 56 cases before their discontinuation on June 21, 1788.

Judges:
William Pace (2/8/1780 - 11/21/1782).
Titus Homer (4/12/1780 - 8/4/1780).
Cyrus Griffin (5/4/1780 - 6/21/1788).
George Read (12/10/1782 - 6/21/1788).
John Lowell (2/12/1783 - 6/21/1788).


Title: Pennsylvania abolishes slavery
Description: The Pennsylvania legislature passed a law entitled An Act for the Gradual Abolition of Slavery. It gave free status to anyone born in the state, and banned the importation of slaves. The model of gradual emancipation was eventually followed by many other states.


Title: New England's Dark Day
Description: 


Title: John André hanged
Description: 


Title: Battle of King's Mountain
Description: 


Title: Articles of Confederation ratified
Description: The Articles of Confederation were ratified by the 13 states of the new United States, in the following order:

1) Virginia (12/16/1777)
2) South Carolina (2/5/1778)
3) New York (2/6/1778)
4) Rhode Island (2/9/1778)
5) Connecticut (2/12/1778)
6) Georgia (2/26/1778)
7) New Hampshire (3/4/1778)
8) Pennsylvania (3/5/1778)
9) Massachusetts (3/10/1778)
10) North Carolina (4/5/1778)
11) New Jersey (11/19/1778)
12) Delaware (2/1/1779)
13) Maryland (2/2/1781)

The government went into effect on March 1, 1781.


Title: Congress of the Confederation
Description: 


Title: Battle of Guilford Courthouse
Description: A large battle between British troops under Lord Cornwallis and American troops under General Greene. After the Battle of Cowpens, Greene led Cornwallis farther and farther from his supply line until he reached modern-day Greensboro, NC. The two sides engaged in close combat, with Cornwallis even firing cannon shots into the battle, killing many of his own men in the process. The Americans retreated, but the British suffered more losses.

Casualties:
American troops
79 or 94 killed
185 wounded
1,046 missing (mostly militia who left after the battle)

British troops
93 killed
408 wounded
25 missing or captured


Title: Bank of North America
Description: 


Title: Siege on Yorktown
Description: 


Title: <b>Surrender at Yorktown</b>
Description: Desperate to win the South, Cornwallis abandoned the Carolinas and moved for Yorktown, VA. Meanwhile, French troops had begun arriving in larger numbers, and they and Washington were ready for a big battle. Washington wanted to attack Clinton at New York, but the French convinced him to instead attack at Yorktown. The French sent a fleet of ships to the Chesapeake Bay led by Admiral Comte de Grasse. In the Battle of the Chesapeake on September 5, the French cleared the British Navy out of the Chesapeake. After that, the Americans and British laid siege to the city for a month before Cornwallis surrendered. More than 7000 British soldiers were captured, and was the last major battle of the war. After the defeat, support for the war in Great Britain was lost and peace negotiations began.


Title: The Dutch Republic recognizes US independence
Description: 


Title: Privateers attack Lunenberg, Nova Scotia
Description: 


Title: Preliminary peace articles drafted
Description: 


Title: Spain recognizes US independence
Description: 


Title: Quock Walker case
Description: Quock Walker was a Massachusetts slave who sued for his freedom in 1781 against his master, Nathaniel Jennison. He won, but Jennison appealed the case to the Supreme Court of Massachusetts. In April 1783, Chief Justice William Cushing ruled in Walker's favor, citing the 1780 state constitution. Its bill of rights begins with "All men are born free and equal, and have certain natural, essential, and unalienable rights: among which May be reckoned the right of enjoying and defending their lives and liberties." Though this line was not explicitly intended to ban slavery, Cushing ruled that it did. Walker won his freedom, and Massachusetts never had slaves again. It was the only state to not have any slaves recorded on the 1790 census.


Title: First United Empire Loyalists reach Parrtown, New Brunswick
Description: 


Title: Soldiers mutiny at Philadelphia
Description: 


Title: Congress moves to Princeton
Description: After US troops Marched on Philadelphia in protest of their wages (or lack thereof), Congress again ran away to the campus of the College of New Jersey (now Princeton). They left after four months.


Title: <i>Commonwealth v. Jennison</i>
Description: Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts rules that slavery is unconstitutional under the state's new constitution.


Title: <b>Treaty of Paris (1783)</b>
Description: A treaty that marked the end of the American Revolution. Great Britain agreed to recognize the sovereignty of the US. It defined the territory of the United States to be all the land east of the Mississippi River, north of Florida (though the border of Florida was still undecided at the time), and south of Canada (there were also some debated territories around modern-day Minnesota and Maine). In return, the US agrees not to prosecute the loyalists for fighting against them. The British agreed to abandon the forts in America territory (which they ended up not doing), and ceded Florida to Spain. France did not get anything in particular. Congress ratified the treaty on January 14, 1784, while the British Parliament ratified it on April 9.


Title: New Hampshire's third constitution
Description: New Hampshire adopted its third and current constitution. Notably, its bill of rights proclaimed that "All men are born equally free and independent" and that "All men have certain natural, essential, and inherent rights - among which are, the enjoying and defending life and liberty." This language would seem to ban slavery in the state, and very similar words in the Massachusetts Constitution was used to successfully ban slavery two years prior. However, no such judicial records for New Hampshire are known, so the legal status of slavery reMained unclear in the state for decades. New Hampshire continued to have a small number of slaves: 158 in 1790,eight in 1800, none in 1810 and 1820, three in 1830, and one in 1840. This was a very small fraction of the state's population, and the state was still known as a free and anti-slavery state.


Title: Congress moves to Annapolis
Description: After leaving Princeton, NJ, Congress reconvened at Annapolis, MD. Here, George Washington resigned as commander-in-chief of the Continental Army on December 23, and the Treaty of Paris was ratified on January 14 of the following year. They left in August for Trenton, NJ, where little of note happened.


Title: Noah Webster's "Blue-Backed Speller" published
Description: 


Title: Rhode Island and Connecticut abolish slavery
Description: Actual date unknown.


Title: Congress ratifies the Treaty of Paris
Description: 


Title: Land Ordinance of 1784
Description: The Land Ordinance of 1784 began the process of organizing the US's new territory to the northwest. The Treaty of Paris gave the US roughly all land between the Great Lakes, the Appalachian Mountains, and the Mississippi River. The ordinance, principally written by Congressman Thomas Jefferson, established that the northern half of the new land, that being the land north of the Ohio River, was to be organized into ten regions. They were to span two degrees of latitude, from roughly the 45th parallel to the 37th, though the Ohio River would be used in place of the 39th parallel as a border. East to west, they were separated by two meridians. One "shall pass through the lowest point of the rapids of Ohio, and the other through the western cape of the mouth of the great Kanhaway."

Jefferson proposed new names for each of the ten prospective states. Sylvania was approximately north of the 45th parallel and northwest of Lake Michigan. Michigania was west of Lake Michigan and included most of modern-day Wisconsin. Assenisipia stretched from the Mississippi River to Lake Michigan, and included where Chicago would later be built. Illinoia sat between the Mississippi and around the midpoint of Lake Michigan. Polypotamia ran from the mouth of the Missouri River to approximately the 37th parallel, and was split in half by the Ohio. Pelisipia included much of modern-day eastern Kentucky, stopped at the east by the mouth of the Kanawha River, and at the north by the Ohio. Washington laid between the mouth of the Kanawha, Lake Erie, the Ohio, and the western Pennsylvanian border. Metropotamia sat on the main Michigan Peninsula, running from about the Detroit River to the southern tip of Lake Erie. Saratoga was between Illinoia, Pelisipia, Washington, and Metropotamia. Finally, Chersonesus took the Michigan Peninsula north of the Detroit River.

Free male adults could move to one of the regions after purchasing the land and establish temporary regional governments. Once a region reached 20,000 inhabitants, it could organize a convention to write a permanent constitution and government. This government must "for ever remain a part of this confederacy," subject to the Articles of Confederation and the acts of Congress, pay their portion of federal debts, and guarantee a republican government. Once a region reached the same population as the least numerous of the original thirteen states, it was to be admitted as a state with equal standing to the originals.

The original draft of the ordinance required the new states to ban slavery and involuntary servitude after the year 1800. To approve this clause, the votes of seven states were needed. Each state had two delegates to Congress, and both had to vote the same way for them to be counted. Of the ten states that attended the vote, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Connecticut, Massachusetts, New York, and Pennsylvania voted for it. South Carolina, Maryland, and Virginia voted against it. North Carolina was divided. New Jersey, whose delegates were expected to vote in favor, had a delegate out sick, and so could not vote. Because only six states voted in favor, the clause failed. Jefferson lamented that just one vote stood against restricting slavery This failure is mostly moot, as just three years later the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 banned slavery in most of the area anyway. If the clause did pass it would ban slavery in the land that would become Kentucky, which was a slave state until 1865. Though it failed, it was the first serious attempt by the federal government to restrict slavery.


Title: Second New Hampshire Constitution
Description: Sometime in 1783, the New Hampshire Constitution was passed, containing a bill of rights that contained text interpreted as the abolition of slavery.


Title: State of Franklin secedes from North Carolina
Description: From 1763 to 1783, the British North American colonies, and later states, had their western borders set at the Appalachian Mountains. Frontiersmen, frustrated that they were being banned from the land they had just fought a war for, ignored the king's orders and began settling west. When the US won its independence in 1783, settling west of the mountains became legal, and various states extended their borders past the mountains to the Mississippi River.

However, frontier settlements were small and sparse, and the mountains presented a great obstacle between them and the state governments in the east. There were no roads, so travel across the mountain range could take over a week. As such, it was often thought among frontiersmen that they ought to set up their own governments out west that they could rely on. The first of these suggestions was Westsylvania, which included most of modern-day West Virginia, but it gained little traction.

The first to gain real support was the so-called State of Frankland, consisting of modern-day eastern Tennessee. At the time, the land belonged to North Carolina. In April 1784, North Carolina offered Congress 45,000 square miles of their land along the mountain range to help alleviate Congress's war debt. Their agreement required Congress to accept responsibility for the land within two years, but due to their distance from the area and their lack of funds they left the area undefended. The frontiersmen were forced to fend for themselves against the Cherokee, whom they were at war with.

On August 23, 1784, representatives from the region's counties declared their secession from North Carolina to form their own government, named Frankland. They elected a governor, a bicameral Congress, a court, and wrote a constitution, though it was never ratified. On May 16, 1785, they applied for statehood, and managed to get seven out of thirteen states to agree. Though that was a majority vote, the Articles of Confederation required a 2/3 majority, or nine states, to add new states. The next month, the prospective state renamed itself to "Franklin" and wrote to Benjamin Franklin to appeal to him. Franklin wrote back that "I am too little acquainted with the circumstances to be able to offer you anything."

The state of Franklin began operating as an independent republic instead, similar to Vermont. They opened more courts, expanded their land from four counties to nine, set a capital at Greeneville, and adopted a new constitution. However, they had no flag and no currency, so they used foreign or federal currency instead. They made peace with most of the native tribes in the region, but continued to fight with the Chickamauga. Among their ranks was Colonel John Sevier, who was elected governor, and General James White, who would later found Knoxville, Tennessee. Future Texian frontiersman Davy Crockett was also born in Franklin in 1786.

The state continued into 1786, the year Congress was supposed to assume control of the land. North Carolina, realizing that Congress was not going to uphold its end of the deal, requested that Franklin come back to them. When they refused, North Carolina sent in the militia. Influential locals became uninterested in Franklin's independence, and the government lost control. On February 29, 1788, Franklin governor John Sevier fought North Carolina Colonels John Tipton and George Maxwell, with roughly 100 militiamen aside. After ten minutes of fighting, Sevier retreated. Desperate to make Franklin succeed, he attempted to get the Spanish to take over. North Carolina officials quickly arrested Sevier. He was freed by his supporters, but at that point it was clear Franklin was not going to succeed. In February 1789, Sevier and the last remaining Franklinites pledged their loyalty to North Carolina, and the state dissolved. The people of Franklin would eventually gain their independence from North Carolina. In 1790, the area was incorporated into the Southwest Territory, which would become the State of Tennessee six years later.

The history of Franklin shows the disconnect frontiersmen had with the rest of the people in their state. It also shows that not all attempts at statehood were successful.


Title: Methodist Episcopal Church established
Description: methodism when it was founded was one of the leading groups behind the antislavery movement at the time


Title: Thomas Jefferson's <i>Notes on the State of Virginia</i>
Description: A book written by Thomas Jefferson. It contained many of his most famous beliefs, such as the separation of church and state, a constitutional government with checks and balances, and individual liberty. Specifically, he affirms that the government's job is purely secular, leading to accusations of atheism by his opponents. He ardently opposes slavery, instead advocating for their emancipation and relocation to Africa. He believes that blacks and whites could not peacefully coexist in the same area, hence his deportation solution. He also writes that blacks were intellectually inferior to whites. He explores the possibilities of a large American navy, an idea that would eventually be adopted by the party of Jefferson's opponents, the Federalists. It was the only full-length book Jefferson wrote, and is often considered to be the most important book in American history before 1800.


Title: Congress moves to New York City
Description: After leaving Trenton, NJ, Congress once again left, this time for New York City, NY for 5 years. They convened at City Hall on Wall Street, and it was here that George Washington was inaugurated. New York reMained the capital until the Compromise of 1790 moved it to Washington DC.


Title: First hot air balloon ride
Description: 


Title: New York Manumission Society founded
Description: 


Title: Land Ordinance of 1785
Description: The Land Ordinance of 1785 was the successor to the similarly named ordinance from the year prior. That ordinance proposed dividing the territory north of the Ohio River into several regions to eventually become new states. This ordinance, written by a committee of six Congressmen, including Thomas Jefferson and Elbridge Gerry, organized a system for settlers for purchasing farmland in the area. It also organized an official survey of the area. The surveyors were to divide the land into square townships, six miles on each side. Each township was subdivided into 36 1-square mile sections. Section 16 of each township, approximately in the center of the township, was to be reserved for public schools. Later, section 36, located at the northwest corner of the township, was also reserved for public education. Many of these schools still exist today.


Title: Bill for Establishing Religious Freedom
Description: A statute written by Thomas Jefferson in 1777 to promote religious tolerance. It guaranteed the freedom of religion to all, including all Christians, Jews, Muslims, and Hindus, as well as de-establishing the Church of England in Virginia. Jefferson found the merging of the church and state to be one of the primary obstacles to liberty, and so doggedly pursued the two's separation, first in Virginia, then in the federal government. He introduced the bill to the House of Burgesses in 1779, where it was bitterly debated for several years, eventually passing in 1786.


Title: <b>Northwest Indian War</b>
Description: The Northwest Indian War was fought between the US and a confederacy of Indian tribes from the Northwest Territory, though most of the fighting was in modern-day Ohio. It was the first major war between the US and American Indians, and the largest war over that region.

During the Revolutionary War, the British claimed control over the region, and was allied with several powerful tribes that lived there, including the Mohawk, Seneca, Cherokee, and Shawnee. The British controlled several forts in the region, both ones they built and ones they took from the French after the French and Indian War. In the Treaty of Paris of 1783, Great Britain ceded control of the region to the US, without mention of the Indians. Mohawk leader Joseph Brant felt as if Great Britain had sold them out, and was determined to stop the US from taking the land. He formed an unprecedentedly-large confederacy of tribes, consisting of the Iroquois, Shawnee, Delaware, and the Council of Three Fires, consisting of the Ojibwe, Odawa, and Potawatomi. Unimpressed, the US demanded the Northwest Confederacy cede the land or face war. Some leaders relented, but others held fast and prepared for war.

In late 1786, US Generals George Rogers Clark and Benjamin Logan organized the frontier militias to attack. In September, Clark took 1200 men to the Wabash River, but soon turned back because of mutiny and desertion. The next month, Logan took 800 men to Shawnee towns along the Mad River, a tributary of the Great Miami River. Logan either did not know or did not care that most of the Shawnee were civilians. They burned the towns and food, and captured and killed many of their inhabitants. This would be the only conflict for several years.

In July 1787, Arthut St. Clair was made governor of the new Northwest Territory. Among his other duties was breaking the confederacy's power and gaining new land through treaties. St. Clair invited various chiefs in the area to Fort Harmar on the Ohio River in modern-day southeastern Ohio to negotiate new treaties. The confederacy was divided. Those closest to the Americans favored compromise, while those farther away, like Brant, wanted the Americans to stop at the tributaries of the Ohio, greatly limiting their expansion. In the end, only minor chiefs signed the new Treaty of Fort Harmar, which mostly just re-established the borders set several years prior. These proceedings only incensed the confederacy further. They began raiding  frontier towns in Kentucky, prompting American raids on nearby Shawnee towns.


Title: <b>Shays' Rebellion</b>
Description: Shays' Rebellion was an uprising of indebted farmers organized by Daniel Shays. Though New England had a thriving merchant economy, most people in the region survived off of subsistence agriculture. In Massachusetts, the farmers lived in the west, away from Boston. These farmers owned little more land than enough to feed their families with, and were usually quite poor. Due to the unstable nature of farming, they might have a surplus one year and a shortage another. Therefore, often farmers would buy supplies from merchants on credit and pay them back in good times.

After the US gained independence in 1783, the merchants' European business partners stopped allowing them to buy on credit, instead requiring hard currency. New England merchants began doing the same for the farmers, who usually did not have enough currency to purchase enough supplies. Many of these farmers were Revolutionary War veterans who were disgruntled with their low pay for their service. Instead of the government owing them money, tax collectors hassled them for money they didn't have. When they couldn't pay, their land, cattle, and other assets were seized. Farmers began to resent tax collectors and the courts they brought them to to force them to pay. In 1785, James Bowdoin took over as Massachusetts governor from the famous John Hancock. Bowdoin raised taxes and increased enforcement, apparently either oblivious or unsympathetic to the farmers' plight.

In August 1786, the Massachusetts state legislature adjourned without addressing the petitions the farmers had sent in about their problems. Angered that their government was ruining their livelihoods and would not even listen to their problems, a group of farmers organized a protest. On August 29, they gathered in Northampton, north of Springfield, and forcefully disbanded the local court. Among these protestors was Daniel Shays, who would soon become the leader of the rebellion. Courts were soon shut down by protestors across the state, though militiamen were able to protect the courthouse in Springfield. The protestors, called "Shaysites," were using similar tactics to those used by the protestors in the 1760s and early 1770s. The Shaysites saw themselves as continuing the revolutionary spirit.

Bowdoin did not see it that way. To him, the Shaysites formed a mob that sowed chaos. State legislator James Warren wrote that "We are now in a state of Anarchy and Confusion bordering on Civil War." Fellow state legislator Samuel Adams, who led the Patriot protests in Boston before the Revolutionary War, was firmly against the Shaysites. He wrote a resolution suspending habeas corpus, and proposed that the rebels be executed. The legislature offered some concessions to the farmers, but also declared that criticizing the government would be banned. This only inflamed the protests further. The legislature requested Congress to send in troops, but the federal government was not well-funded enough to afford them. Since Congress did not have the authority to enforce tax collection, states rarely sent any money to them, so they could never afford anything. Instead, Bowdoin hired 3000 militiamen, headed by General Benjamin Lincoln, who had accepted the British surrender at Yorktown in 1783.

Meanwhile, the farmers had become more organized. Now led by Shays and his ally, Luke Day, they planned on raiding the federal armory in Springfield. It was protected by local militia commander General William Shepard and 1200 miltiamen. They were unsuccessful, and when Lincoln and his men arrived, the rebels scattered, marking the end of the uprising. 4000 people signed confessions of their participation in the rebellion in exchange for amnesty. Almost every rebel, including the ringleaders, were either pardoned, or had their sentences overturned or commuted. Only two were executed, having been convicted of looting. Shays himself was pardoned, but was lambasted by the Boston press as an anarchist. He moved to New York and died in poverty in 1825.

Though the rebels failed, Congress's inability to act worried many. It was seen as just the latest example of the federal government being too impotent to accomplish anything useful, forcing the states to fend for themselves. Many became convinced that the Confederate Congress needed strengthening. Thomas Jefferson, on the other hand, remained unimpressed with the situation, claiming that "The tree of liberty must be refreshed from time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants." Nevertheless, he was in France at the time, and so had no influence on the upcoming Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia. The rebellion convinced others that the Articles of Confederation were unsalvabeable, and that an entirely new constitution was necessary.


Title: Annapolis Convention
Description: The Annapolis Convention was a short meeting between several states in Annapolis, Maryland, about interstate trade barriers. Only New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Virginia showed up. Despite the convention being in Annapolis, Maryland was among the states that declined to send delegates.

As the delegates began their discussion, they realized the limits of the convention and of their government's system in general. The Articles of Confederation had shown themselves multiple times to be too weak and disorganized to accomplish anything significant. As such, instead of working out the issue they showed up to resolve, the delegates messaged Congress, requesting that a constitutional convention be held to reform the Articles.


Title: The Stoughton Society, the oldest musical organization in the US, is founded
Description: 


Title: <b>Constitutional Convention</b>
Description: The Articles of Confederation had organized the US government for almost ten years since they were written. But with every year, it became increasingly clear that its government was not going to last. Frequent disagreements between states made attaining the supermajorities required for major acts like treaties and constitutional amendments infeasible. The country nearly missed the quorum required to sign the Treaty of Paris, which gave them the independence they spent the last five years fighting for. Constitutional amendments could be stopped by a single state, even if all others were in favor. Congress was unable to enforce taxation, meaning that states could choose how much money they wanted to pay. Since no one likes paying taxes and raising taxes would be politically unpopular, states typically sent very little money, sometimes none at all. This meant that Congress was unable to fulfill what few duties it did have. Its impotence was put on display in 1786, when it was unable to raise an army to put down Shays' Rebellion. That year, delegates at the Annapolis Convention formally requested Congress for a convention to amend the Articles of Confederation, to be held in Philadelphia in mid-1787. 12 states sent delegates, but New Hampshire's did not join until July 23, and Rhode Island sent none at all. Additionally, two of New York's delegates left early, leaving only Alexander Hamilton for most of the convention.

Some of these delegates believed that the Articles of Confederation could not be saved, and that a new constitution with a stronger federal government was necessary. Chief among them was James Madison of Virginia. Madison was a member of the Confederate Congress, so he knew firsthand how impotent they were. He knew the idea of a new constitution would be controversial, so he lured the delegates in with the pretense of merely amending the Articles, hoping to convince them at the convention. He also knew that if Revolutionary War hero George Washington attended, the other delegates would be much more likely to support the idea. After the war, Washington had retired to Mount Vernon, not planning on going back into politics or the military. Madison managed to coax him into attending, insisting that it was necessary for the country he worked so hard to build. While in Philadelphia, Washington stayed at the house of Robert Morris, a delegate from Pennsylvania. 

The convention was scheduled to begin on May 14, but by then only the Pennsylvania and Virginia delegations had arrived. It was not until the 25th that a quorum of seven states was met. The convention was to take place at the same State House that the Declaration of Independence was signed in, which was later named Independence Hall. Once the quorum was achieved, the delegates present unanimously chose Washington as the chairman. However, in an effort to remain impartial Washington made almost no comments on anything substantive during the convention. The delegates decided to hold the convention in secret, so they could freely speak without public influence interfering. So, despite the intense and stuffy Philadelphia summer heat, the convention building's doors were locked and its windows nailed shut. This secrecy was a source of outrage for many, who felt that the government was being altered without the "consent of the governed" the Declaration of Independence had proclaimed to be an inalienable right. Nevertheless, this was exactly the kind of public influence the delegates wanted to seclude themselves from, so the debates continued in secret. The proceedings are secret even to later historians. The convention's official secretary, William Jackson of South Carolina, took sparse and vague notes. Most information about the convention is from Madison's notes, which were not published until after his death in 1836.

Before the convention started, Madison researched various democracies, confederacies, and republics, both historical and contemporary. He examined what factors let those governments succeed, and in the case of ancient states, what brought them down. He paid particular attention to the failures of the Confederate Congress, and published them in April 1787 in a report titled, "Vices of the Political System of the United States." From his research, he drafted his own plan for the new federal government, mainly inspired by the various state governments. As he was one of the delegates from Virginia, his proposal was known as the Virginia Plan for the US Constitution.

The Virginia Plan declared that the federal government ought to defend the country from invasions or civil unrest, and that the Articles of Confederation had been written in different times, when the country was not plagued by rebellions and economic woes. As such, the Confederation did not have the power to fulfill its duties. The substance of the plan was fifteen resolutions. It proposed a bicameral legislature, one to be elected by the people, and the other to be elected by the first, or by state legislatures. Both houses could originate bills. Together, they possessed every power granted to the Confederate Congress, as well as the ability to veto state laws, and to legislate for situations the states could not resolve themselves. It would have the power to force unruly states to comply with federal laws. The legislature would appoint a national executive, for one term only. The legislature would also appoint judges to a national judiciary, consisting of one or more supreme tribunals, and numerous inferior tribunals. The executive and judiciary could create a council of revision, which held veto power on national legislation. Overall, the Virginia Plan's government was far more powerful than the one under the Articles of Confederation. It was certainly unconventional. The traditional school of thought was to limit a democracy or republic to a small and homogenous state, like ancient Athens, or contemporary Denmark and Switzerland. The Roman Republic functioned well at first, but fell apart as it expanded. It was believed that too large or diverse a country, like the US was even then, would not work with a powerful central government. But Madison thought differently. His research had convinced him that the great size and diversity of the US would be an asset, not a detriment. With many competing interests, factionalism would be discouraged and compromise would be necessary. Compared to the constitution the convention ultimately produced (which is itself the shortest currently existing constitution in the world), the Virginia Plan is quite short, and contains numerous blanks, such as term lengths. The plan was meant to be fleshed out at the convention.

Indeed, when fellow Virginia delegate Edmund Randolph presented the idea to the convention on May 29, most of the delegates were impressed, and it became the template for the rest of the discussion. Even after discovering that they were brought to the convention under false pretenses, most of them warmed up to Madison's insistence that a new government was important. They all recognized the failures of the Confederation, but were divided on what kind of government should replace it. The same day, Charles Pinckney of South Carolina proposed his own plan, which also strengthened the national government. Many of his suggestions made it into the final product, such as naming the two houses the Senate and House of Representatives (though Pinckney originally called it the House of Delegates). The next day, the delegates agreed on creating a three-branch federal government, which would be supreme over the states. In doing this, they had all agreed to creating a new, more powerful government.

On the next day, May 31, the main topic of discussion was how Congress would be organized. They quickly agreed on a bicameral legislature, with one being smaller and more exclusive. Every state legislature except Pennsylvania's was set up like this, as they were in turn based off of British Parliament, composed of the lower House of Commons and the upper House of Lords. Therefore, they had been used to a very similar setup for centuries. They also agreed that the House of Representatives ought to be popularly elected, though there was some dissent from some, including Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts, Roger Sherman of Connecticut, and Pierce Butler of South Carolina. As for the Senate, the Virginia Plan originally called for the House to appoint its members. However, much of the delegation wanted it to be done by state legislatures to protect their interests.  On June 7, after a week of debating, that idea's support had become unanimous.

The most contentious issue for the delegates was proportional representation in Congress. The Virginia Plan originally called for the number of representatives from each state in both houses to be proportional to that state's population. Just three states, Virginia, Pennsylvania, and Massachusetts, represented over half of the country's population, but were frequently outvoted in the Confederation because each state had equal power. Madison believed proportional representation was more fair, but being from the largest state likely influenced his opinion. Delegates from the smaller states feared that in a government of proportional representation, their power would diminish and their interests and issues would be ignored. On June 11, one such delegate, Roger Sherman of Connecticut, suggested a compromise. The House would have proportional representation, but the Senate would have equal representation for each state. He had suggested a similar arrangement in 1776 to the Continental Congress, but was rejected by the smaller states, who did not want to introduce proportional representation in any form. At the convention, his plan failed again, 6-5.

Instead, delegates from several of the smaller states, including New Jersey, Connecticut, Maryland, and New York, crafted a counter to the Virginia Plan. On June 15, William Paterson of New Jersey presented the New Jersey Plan for the US Constitution. The main change from the Virginia Plan was to have a unicameral legislature with each state having one vote, just like the Confederate Congress they already had. The New Jersey Plan had its fair share of support, especially from delegates of small states, like Paterson and Sherman. For three days the plan was hotly debated. Supporters, calling themselves "old Patriots" of the revolution and "men of principles," felt that the New Jersey Plan protected state sovereignty and the Virginia Plan would not. Anyway, the convention had no authority to determine plans like Virginia's that were such a departure from the current government. Opponents noted that while the convention could not decide anything, they could suggest anything, even something like the Virginia Plan.

On June 18, Alexander Hamilton of New York proposed his own plan, based more closely on the British government. It consisted of a bicameral legislature with a popularly-elected lower house. The people would choose electors that would appoint the members of the upper house, as well as a single executive, both of which would serve for life. He also suggested that states essentially be abolished, becoming more like the counties in Great Britain. State governments were extremely important to most Americans, who identified more with them than with the federal government. Nobody seriously considered the idea, and it has even been suggested that Hamilton only proposed the plan to make the Virginia Plan seem more reasonable by comparison. If so, it worked. on June 19, the convention voted on the New Jersey Plan, defeating it 7-3, with Maryland being divided.

But this did not mean the issue was settled. As the convention headed into July, they were no closer to reaching a decision. With dozens of delegates in the room at a time, it was often difficult to have a meaningful debate. Therefore, the delegates decided to form a committee, with one representative from each of the eleven states (New Hampshire's delegates had not yet arrived), to argue the issue and report back. Famous members included Benjamin Franklin from Pennsylvania, Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts, George Mason of Virginia, William Paterson of New Jersey, and John Rutledge of South Carolina. They settled on Sherman's compromise from June 11 and reported back to the convention on July 5.

But the compromise would not be agreed to until the question of proportional representation in regard to slavery had been answered. The Connecticut Compromise proposed each state's representation being based on its number of free inhabitants plus three-fifths of their slaves. Slave states supported including all slaves to bolster their numbers, while free states opposed counting any slaves for the same reason. Antislavery delegates were repulsed by even mentioning slavery in the constitution, while proslavery delegates threatened to refuse to back the document if it was not protected. The three-fifths number was intended as a compromise. The delegates argued over it for several days, and eventually agreed on the now infamous Three-Fifths Clause as it had originally been suggested. In return, they omitted words like "slaves," opting instead to use "free persons" and "other persons." They also agreed to periodic censuses to keep Congress updated with current populations. On July 16, the convention narrowly adopted the Connecticut Compromise, 5-4 and 1 divided. On July 23, they decided to reduce the Senate to two members per state instead of the original three. Also, senators could vote individually, instead of having to agree with the other senator from their state, like representatives at the Confederate Congress did.

While proportional representation was the most contentious issue, it was not the only one. Another topic of discussion was the
executive branch. In Great Britain, Parliament passed the laws and the king and his courts carried them out, so the delegates agreed to a similar arrangement. While they were all certain they didn't want a king, how many people the executive ought to be and how they were chosen was up for debate. The Virginia Plan had the executive appointed by Congress. James Wilson of Pennsylvania was the most outspoken opponent of this, fearing the executive would be too dependent on Congress. On June 1, he spoke in favor of a single executive, independent of Congress. He believed he could be the leader of all Americans, rich and poor alike. Charles Pinckney seconded him, asking that the single executive be called the president. Also joining them was John Dickinson of Delaware, who had written the Articles of Confederation. They suggested that Washington would be the perfect choice for their first president. The idea of a single executive had many dissenters, chief among them Sherman, Randolph, Mason, and Pierce Butler of South Carolina. Though now they chose their words carefully. They all held a great respect for Washington, and he was even there in the room. Instead, they voiced their concerns of future, worse presidents to come after Washington. Those presidents could consolidate power and effectively become an elected monarch, an unsavory vision on the heels of the Revolution. Instead, they favored two or three executives, like the two consuls of the Roman Republic. This time, Washington voted with the delegates. The single executive won 7-3, with New York, Delaware, and Maryland voting against. Among the yea-votes was the Virginia delegation, including Washington himself. At that moment, Mason declared the old Confederation dead.

From there, the convention needed to decide how the president was to be elected. Most opposed popular election. A few delegates, like Roger Sherman and Elbridge Gerry, thought the average American to be too easily persuaded by demagogues, but the main concern was the slow dissemination of information. The length of the country, slowness of horses, and lack of roads meant that it could take over a week for information to get from one side of the country to the other, perhaps longer if traveling over the Appalachian Mountains to the frontier. Voters would not be able to make an informed decision. Roger Sherman proposed the president be elected like a prime minister, being chosen and held accountable by Congress, but it was rejected for creating too weak and dependent of an executive. Others suggested election via state legislatures, but Madison opposed it, afraid the president would play favorites with key states instead of serving the whole country. James Wilson suggested that states be divided into districts, where voters would choose electors, who would choose the president. Elbridge Gerry wanted the state governors to elect the president, but received little support. They ultimately decided on the legislature selecting the president. 

The delegation resumed debates over the presidency in July. They had initially decided the president would serve a single, seven-year term, but changed it to allow multiple terms. James McClurg of Virginia suggested that the president serve for life to protect his independence, but, like Hamilton, was quickly shot down for being too close to a monarchy. Luther Martin of Maryland submitted an amended version of Wilson's proposal, but this too was turned down. John Dickinson of Delaware proposed that Congress or the states could remove the president from office prematurely, which was also mentioned in the Virginia Plan. There was also a precedent from Great Britain, as Parliament could impeach and remove royally-appointed ministers. Madison and James Wilson opposed the idea, wanting the executive to remain independent.

The convention then discussed the Counvil of Revision, proposed in the Virginia Plan. Wilson and Hamilton thought that mixing the executive and judiciary was a bad idea, advocating for the president alone to have veto power. Benjamin Franklin countered, citing how in the past, colonial governors had abused their veto power to extort the legislature. Elbridge Gerry proposed that Congress could overrule a veto with a two-thirds majority. Aside from Madison, the convention fell disinterested in the Council of Revision existing at all, preferring the president to have veto power instead.

As for the judiciary, the convention agreed to make it independent of both Congress and the executive branch. This was a departure from tradition, as in Great Britain the courts were seen as instruments of the king. American colonists had grown to see the courts as sources of corruption. They unanimously agreed that it would consist of one Supreme Court and multiple inferior courts. The Virginia Plan proposed that Congress appoint the judges, while Wilson wanted it to be done by the president. The other delegates were roughly divided between the two ideas. Nathaniel Gorham of Massachusetts proposed, as a compromise, that the president appoint judges "with the advice and consent of the Senate." Madison favored requiring the Senate to pass a two-thirds majority to reject appointments, but the convention went with Gorham's idea, feeling Madison's would make the president too powerful.

On July 17, the convention also discussed the relationship between federal and state power. Federalism, or the division of power between a national government and its constituent states, was unprecedented. Every government beforehand had been a unitary national government or a confederacy of sovereign states. The Virginia Plan provided for Congress to make laws in cases where the states were "incompetent," supremacy over conflicting state laws. The convention voted in favor of this provision, with only South Carolina and Georgia dissenting. Four of the yea-votes were the small states of Maryland, Connecticut, New Jersey, and Delaware. Normally, the small states would be opposed to such an expansion of federal power. Madison would later write his belief that their support was due to accepting the Connecticut Compromise. Once the small states realized they would be represented, they enthusiastically supported a strong central government. Less popular was the Virginia Plan's provision for Congressional veto power over state laws. Madison believed it was essential to protect states from behaving irresponsibly. He cited the rampant inflation created by unchecked printing of paper currency, and the refusal to give the Confederation its proper dues. Most delegates opposed the idea, believing it would infringe on state sovereignty. Luther Martin of Maryland also cited its impracticality, as every state law would have to be submitted to Congress for approval, a slow process to be sure. Instead, Martin suggested language taken from the New Jersey Plan, "that the Legislative acts of the US made by virtue and pursuance of the articles of Union, and all treaties made and ratified under the authority of the US shall be the supreme law of the respective States... and that the... States shall be bound thereby in their decisions." The convention unanimously approved.

The amendment process was another important topic of discussion. Many felt that a large weakness of the Articles of Confederation was the requirement of unanimous consent by the states to amend them. In the eight years that the Articles were officially in effect, no amendment was ever successfully passed. In 1782, an amendment to allow Congress to levy taxes on imports had support from every state except Rhode Island, so did not pass. The convention decided a new amendment process was necessary, but was unable to agree on one. They also discussed how the new constitution itself would become legitimate. Paterson and Oliver Ellsworth thought the states should ratify it, while Madison and Mason wanted it to be done by special state conventions. The convention voted 9-1 to ratify the constitution through the state conventions.

On July 26, after two months of debate, the convention was finally ready to create a first draft. They created a Committee of Detail, consisting of Randolph, Ellsworth, Wilson, and Gorham, and chaired by John Rutledge. The draft was intended to be clear and concise, and included various undiscussed but uncontroversial elements, such as protecting Congressmen from retribution over comments they made in office. But the draft they produced varied significantly from what the convention had agreed upon.

The broad powers of Congress were cut down to only a list of enumerated powers. Congress under the Articles of Confederation could levy peace and war, enter into treaties and alliances, regulate the post office and military, and mint coins, as well as a few other minor powers. To this, the convention added the power to enforce tax collection, regulate commerce, create laws of naturalization, create copyright laws, create inferior federal courts, call the militia to defend states from "domestic violence," and create and maintain a navy. Most important of these was the increased power over taxes. It was widely agreed that the new (and old) government could not function if it could only request states for money. Power over import taxes, which were by far the most lucrative taxes at the time, was moved from the states to Congress. They also added the Elastic Clause, which allowed Congress to pass any legislation "necessary and proper" to fulfilling its mentioned duties.

They also included several protections of slavery. Congress would be forbidden from regulating or banning the slave trade, and taxing exports. Any legislation about tariffs, like the colonial Navigation Acts, would require a two-thirds majority. They did this because of Charles Pinckney of South Carolina, who warned that if Southern interests were not explicitly protected, the South would not support the new constitution. Nevertheless, when the committee presented their draft on August 6, many of the delegates were shocked that such large change were made without consulting the rest of the convention.

The convention spent the next month arguing over the committee's draft, though few suggestions made it into the final version. The permanent ban on Congressional interference in the slave trade was changed to only last until 1808. Northern and Southern delegates agreed to a compromise in which the two-thirds requirement for regulating international trade was lifted in exchange for the Fugitive Slave Clause being strengthened. As a minor concession to the North, explicit mention of slavery was once again omitted, using language like "domestic institutions" instead. Many of the delegates were antislavery, even some Southerners like Washington. They considered it an embarrasment that a document as important as the Constitution directly referred to slavery, which they saw as antithetical to the spirit of their new country. The pro-slavery delegates were willing to concede this, as the protections of slavery were more important to them than the language. Various other postponed issues were delegated to another committee, composed of members more favorable to compromise like Madison. At this point, most of the delegates were tired of the heat and arguing and wanted to go home, so were more willing to compromise. The committee shortened the presidential term to four years, empowered the Senate to run impeachment trials instead of the courts, and required bills relating to raising revenue to originate in the House of Representatives. It created the office of vice president, who was only officially empowered to preside over the Senate, break ties in the Senate, and take over as president in case the current one died. It gave the president the power to make treaties and appoint ambassadors, which previously was under the jurisdiction of the Senate. Gerry, Randolph, and Mason were the principal opponents of the latest draft. They complained about a lot but changed little. They got a line about impeachinig the president for "high crimes and misdemeanors" added. They also re-added the Virginia Plan's method of state legislatures ratifying constitutional amendments, which nearly every amendment has been ratified through.

The delegates were nearly ready to put the finishing touches on the Constitution, but Mason brought up a final concern. The document was missing a bill of rights, a set of protections for the people's fundamental rights. Gerry seconded him, but the rest of the delegation, tired and wanting to go home, silenced them. They believed that states already protected their citizens' rights, and that if the Constitution did not empower the government to take away rights, which they believed it didn't, then adding protections of rights was unnecessary. Mason's and Gerry's objections would become a central point of contention among those reluctant to ratify the Constitution.

Nevertheless, the vast majority of the convention was ready to be finished. They created a Committee of Style and Arrangement to improve the language of the document. Gouverneur Morris of Pennsylvania was the principal author of the final draft. Nearly every delegate was satisfied with the end result. Benjamin Franklin remarked that "there are several parts of this Constitution which I do not at present approve, but... I doubt too whether any other Convention we can obtain, may be able to make a better Constitution... It therefore astonishes me, Sir, to find this system approaching so near to perfection as it does."

The final document was signed by, as Washington remarked, "eleven states, and Colonel Hamilton." He signed it first, then passed it among the others. Though 55 delegates ultimately attended the convention, only 39 delegates signed the final product. Most of the abstainers were not present at the time for various reasons. Randolph, Gerry, and Mason were the only ones in attendance who refused to sign it, citing a lack of a bill of rights. Several otherwise prominent Founding Fathers were absent from the convention. Thomas Jefferson was in France as an ambassador, and John Adams was in Great Britain for the same reason. John Hancock, Samuel Adams, and Patrick Henry were also absent, suspicious of the more powerful government the convention would no doubt produce.

While the delegates were signing, Franklin observed a painting of a sun on the horizon on Washington's chair. He said of the sun that "often in the course of the Session, and the vicissitudes of my hopes and fears as to its issue, looked at that behind the president without being able to tell whether it was rising or setting: But now at length I have the happiness to know that it is a rising and not a setting Sun." By this, he meant that he believed the new Constitution marked the beginning of their new nation, not its end.

Though the Constitution was signed by almost every delegate after four months of debate, it was not the end. Under its own rules, it had to be ratified by the legislatures of nine states before it would go into effect. Fierce debates raged across the country over whether to accept the Constitution, particularly when it did not contain a bill of rights. Nevertheless, the states would ratify it, and a bill of rights was added. The Constitution has been in effect for over two centuries since, making it the oldest active constitution of a major country.


Title: <b>Northwest Ordinance of 1787</b>
Description: The Northwest Ordinance was a law passed by the Confederate Congress that created the Northwest Territory, a US-controlled region between the Great Lakes, the Mississippi River, and the Ohio River. It was a continuation of the Land Ordinances of 1784 and 1785, which sought to organize part of the new territory gained during the American Revolution. On August 7, 1789, the ordinance was re-adopted under the new government in the same form as before.

It established the Northwest Territory, which could be divided into two districts at a later point if Congress so desired. It established some basic inheritance laws for the territory's inhabitants. Congress was to appoint a governor for three years, a secretary for four years, and a court of three judges with life terms. The governor ran the territory, the secretary kept records to be sent to Congress every six months, and the court was to settle legal disputes in the territory. During their terms, all five were to live in the territory and received 500 acres of land (1000 for the governor) there to live on. The governor and judges could pass laws for the territory, though Congress held veto power. The governor was also commander-in-chief of the militia. He commissioned lower-level officers, while Congress appointed higher-ranking ones. Finally, the governor could appoint magistrates to run the counties and townships. The governor had the power to make laws and appoint magistrates until the general assembly was officially established, whereupon it would take those powers.

The general assembly consisted of the governor, a legislative council, and a house of representatives. Districts got one representative for every 500 male residents. Each representative served for two years, lived in their district, and received 200 acres of land. The legislative council consisted of five members with five-year terms. Any law was to receive a majority from the council and house, and assent from the governor, similar to the legislative process established by the Constitution written the same year.

Every inhabitant was guaranteed certain rights. Among these were freedom of religion, habeas corpus, trial by jury, bail, protection against excessive bail and cruel and unusual punishment, and compensation for eminent domain. Many of these would be incorporated into the Bill of Rights several years later. The rights of Indians were to be respected, and their property was to be untouched without their consent. Education was encouraged, to promote religion, morality, and knowledge. 

The territory was to permanently join the US and be subject to the Articles of Confederation. Territorial inhabitants were to pay their portion of federal debts. This section was taken from the Land Ordinance of 1784. The navigable waters leading into the Mississippi and St. Lawrence Rivers were declared to be free for all.

The territory was to eventually be divided into three to five states. The western state was to be bound by the Mississippi, Ohio, and Wabash (which runs through modern-day Indiana). The eastern border was a line from the Wabash and Post Vincents (now called the Forts of Vincennes, in Knox County, IN, close to the White River) due north to the Canadian border. The line was to then run to the "Lake of the Woods" and the Mississippi. The middle state was to be bound by the Wabash and Post Vincents to the Ohio to the west, and a line due north from the mouth of the Great Miami River (a tributary of the Ohio, in the southwest of modern-day Ohio) to the east. The eastern state was to be bound by the same Miami line to the west, the Ohio to the south, and the Pennsylvanian border to the east. However, Congress can adjust these borders if desired, and also carve out up to two more states from the region. Once a prospective state attained 60,000 inhabitants, it was to be admitted to Congress with equal standing to the original states. It was also to write a constitution guaranteeing a republican government, and following the general principles of the Ordinance and the Articles of Confederation. It is worth noting that Congress did not end up keeping any of these borders, and the land in the Northwest Territory ended up becoming five states and part of a sixth.

Finally, Article 6 proclaimed that "There shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in the said territory, otherwise than in the punishment of crimes whereof the party shall have been duly convicted," as well as a fugitive slave clause similar to that in the Constitution. A similar clause in the Land Ordinance of 1784 was narrowly defeated in Congress, but it passed this time. It was the first successful attempt by the federal government to restrict slavery. The Ohio River that demarcated the southern border of the Northwest Territory became an unofficial expansion of the Mason-Dixon Line separating free states from slave states. The punishment clause in this article became standard in legislation and constitutions banning slavery, including the 13th Amendment, which banned slavery nationwide.

The Northwest Ordinance is often hailed as an achievement for a government that had few. The territory would eventually become the states of Ohio, Indiana, Michigan, Illinois, and Wisconsin, as well as part of Minnesota. All of these states forever banned slavery, and were places slaves from the South would often flee to for safety. It established a precedent for creating territories, including federal control over the legality of slavery, an appointed governor running the area, guaranteeing liberties for the inhabitants, and promoting public education.


Title: <b>Constitution written</b>
Description: The Constitution, the second draft for the American government, was written. It featured a more powerful federal government, composed of three branches: a legislative branch (to pass laws), an executive branch (to enforce the law), and a judicial branch (to interpret the law). The legislative branch consists of Congress, composed of the House of Representatives, led by the Speaker of the House, and the Senate, led by the vice president. The executive branch is led by the president, followed by the vice president and presidential cabinet. The judicial branch is headed by the Supreme Court, followed by the Courts of Appeals, then the district courts. It featured many compromises, like the Connecticut Compromise (which organized a bicameral legislature) and the Three-Fifths Compromise (which counted slaves as 3/5 of a person when accounting for representation in the House of Representatives).

Full Text
https://bit.ly/2Oni6cp


Title: Anti-Federalist Papers
Description: Though most Americans today hold the Constitution in high regard, when it was written in 1787, the country was much more divided. Opponents of ratification, derided as "Anti-Federalists," spoke out and wrote against the document. As the most famous Federalist essays became known as the Federalist Papers, their counterpart was later called the Anti-Federalist Papers. However, unlike the Federalist Papers, these were not coordinated by its authors or published under a moniker like "The Anti-Federalist." As was tradition for politically controversial essays at the time, its authors wrote them anonymously under pseudonyms. Another tradition was for people who fancied themselves as pro-republican to use Julius Caesar's opponents' names as pseudonyms, like Brutus and Cato. At the time, Americans saw Caesar as a tyrant and his assassins as protectors of democracy, and the Anti-Federalists feared the Constitution could create a monarchy.

The most prominent Anti-Federalist was Patrick Henry, who was quick to cry words like "tyranny." Famed for his oratory skills, he was a strong opponent for the Federalists. He was joined by various other prominent figures, including Elbridge Gerry, George Mason, and Edmund Randolph, all three of which had all attended the Constitutional Convention and were dissatisfied with the final product.

The Anti-Federalists had numerous complaints about the Constitution. They feared that a single executive could become a monarch. They worried that no bill of rights would lead to despotism. They thought that a powerful federal government would infringe on state sovereignty, and would be too far away from most Americans to respond properly to their concerns.

Though the Anti-Federalists were eventually unable to stop the Constitution from being ratified, they were able to secure a bill of rights in the form of ten amendments.


Title: <b>Federalist Papers</b>
Description: Creating the Constitution and getting nearly every delegate present to sign it was no easy feat, but the arguments over accepting it
were not over. The United States was, first and foremost, a union of states. Therefore, the states had to agree to the document before
it could go into effect. When the Constitution was finished and copies were given to every state, debates over ratification raged on.
Because the Constitution was full of compromises, nearly everybody could find something in it they didn't like, or something not in it
they wanted.

Supporters of the Constitution called themselves Federalists, and their opponents Anti-Federalists. The latter group was led by famed
orator Patrick Henry, always more cautious and outspoken than most about the dangers of tyranny and despotism. The Anti-Federalists
were concerned with the dramatically-increased power of the federal government, afraid that it would infringe on the states'
sovereignty. They looked at the single executive and saw a monarch. They worried that a lack of a bill of rights meant the federal
government was open to abuse its citizens.

Alexander Hamilton and James Madison had both attended the Constitutional Convention and signed the final draft. They wanted to
see it succeed, so set out to convince the country to accept it. Along with fellow Federalist John Jay, they wrote a series of 85 essays called "The Federalist" explaining and advocating for various controversial passages in the Constitution. As was tradition for authoring controversial essays at the time, the three wrote them anonymously. They chose the pseudonym, "Publius," to suggest their allegiance with the people. Hamilton wrote 51, the vast majority, including the first issue. Jay wrote the next four, but then fell ill and only contributed one more afterwards. Madison authored the remaining 29. However, because they wrote them anonymously, it is difficult to know the author of every essay. They wrote them quickly, sometimes multiple a week, leaving little time for their opponents to give a proper rebuttal. They published them in various newspapers in New York, both Hamilton's home state and one of the most divided states over ratification.

Their actual influence over the ratification debate is questionable. They were rarely printed outside New York, and by the time the state voted on ratification, the Constitution had already received approval from the required nine states. At that point, it was in New York's best interest to join with the rest of the country. Nevertheless, the Federalist Papers, as they came to be known, established a legacy for themselves. They have been viewed throughout US history as explanations of the Framers' intents for the Constitution, and have been frequently cited in debates over constitutional law.


Title: Delaware ratifies the Constitution
Description: Delaware was named after Lord De La Warr, first governor of Virginia. He had happened upon the land and claimed it for Virginia. Delaware was first claimed by John Cabot in 1497, exploring for England. But the first to colonize the area were the Dutch, claiming they had the right from the 1609 exploration of Henry Hudson, who sailed for them. They built several trading posts around Delaware Bay. They had few actual settlers in the area. Their only settlement, Zwaanendael, built in 1631 at modern-day Lewes, was quickly destroyed in a war with local Indians. In 1638, Sweden set up its own competing colony in the area, at modern-day Wilmington. In 1654, they captured the Fort Casimir, now New Castle, built by the Dutch four years prior. Now provoked, New Netherland led an expedition into New Sweden, defeating and annexing them. New Netherland was in turn annexed by the English in 1664 and given to the Duke of York. In 1682, he gave the three counties that would become Delaware to his friend, William Penn. After an 80-year legal battle with Maryland, Delaware's border's were set at the Mason-Dixon line. Its small size would render it underpopulated forever.

Initially, Delaware, then called the Lower Counties on the Delaware, shared both a governor and legislature with Pennsylvania, also managed by Penn. Wanting to ensure equality between the two colonies, Penn required legislation to pass with both Pennsylvania and the Lower Counties' consent, and for the legislature to alternate meeting in Philadelphia and New Castle. As Pennsylvania grew, they stopped wanting to get approval from a few hundred people in the south. The Lower Counties, wanting more autonomy, arranged with Pennsylvania to get its own legislature, though they would still share a governor.

The Lower Counties joined twelve other colonies in rebellion against Great Britain in 1775. The next year, it and the others declared independence. The Lower Counties wrote their first constitution soon after, renaming themselves to the Delaware State, later the State of Delaware. Because of its small size and population, it saw little action during the Revolution. Instead, its revolutionary contribution came in the form of Delawarean John Dickinson. He wrote the 1767-68 Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania (Dickinson often also called himself Pennsylvanian), and was a delegate to both the First and Second Continental Congresses. He signed the Continental Association in 1774, wrote much of the 1774 Petition to the King, and wrote the 1775 Olive Branch Petition. He helped revise Thomas Jefferson's 1775 Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms. He helped write the Model Treaty, and wrote the 1777 Articles of Confederation. He was president of the 1786 Annapolis Convention, a delegate at the Constitutional Convention of 1787, and signed the Constitution.

Speaking of the Constitution, Delaware's proudest achievement is being the first to sign the Constitution, calling itself the First State. It, like most small states at the time, was a strong supporter of the new constitution, and it was easily ratified unanimously at its convention.


Title: Pennsylvania ratifies the Constitution
Description: Pennsylvania means "Penn's Woods," named after its founder, William Penn. The first European settlement in the region was Fort Nya Gothenburg on Tinicum Island (very southeastern corner of Pennsylvania). The fort fell into Dutch hands along with the rest of New Sweden in 1655, then to the English in 1664. 

In the west, in 1754 the French built Fort Duquesne at the confluence of the Allegheny and Monongahela Rivers, tributaries of the Ohio River. This fort was a key point of contention during the French and Indian War of 1754-63. The British made two attempts at the fort, losing both times. In November 1758, the French abandoned and burned it. In its place, the British built Fort Pitt, around which the city of Pittsburgh grew.


Title: New Jersey ratifies the Constitution
Description: 


Title: Georgia ratifies the Constitution
Description: 


Title: Connecticut ratifies the Constitution
Description: 


Title: Massachusetts ratifies the Constitution
Description: 


Title: First permanent US settlement in the Northwest Territory
Description: 


Title: Maryland ratifies the Constitution
Description: 


Title: South Carolina ratifies the Constitution
Description: 


Title: <b>Constitution ratified</b>
Description: Though today the Constitution is celebrated by most Americans, it was quite controversial when it was first written. The Constitutional Convention saw months of debates, arguments, personal attacks, and eventual compromise. But at the end, nearly every delegate at the convention signed it, a testament to the compromises that went into creating it. But that was not the end. The Constitution, by the delegates' design, needed to be ratified by nine of the thirteen states, or two thirds. Following the announcement of the completed Constitution were months of equally heated debate among common people, newspapers, and the state legislators themselves. 

At the convention, three of the delegates, Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts, and Edmund Randolph and George Mason of Virginia, refused to sign the final document. They were concerned that the federal government was too powerful, and would threaten the states' sovereignty. They also disliked the lack of a bill of rights, which would protect the people and states from such a government.

When the Constitution was sent to the thirteen states to be ratified, issues like these became the main sources of contention. The pro-Constitution side, who called themselves Federalists, were led by James Madison and Alexander Hamilton. They argued that a bill of rights was unnecessary or even harmful. Madison claimed that the separation of powers and system of checks and balances in the federal government would make infringing on individual rights difficult without the cooperation of the other branches, an unlikely scenario. He also worried that specifying certain rights would lead the federal government to later believe that only those rights were protected.

The Constitution's opponents, derided as Anti-Federalists, counted many famous American revolutionaries among them: Patrick Henry, the famed orator who delivered the "Give Me Liberty or Give Me Death" speech, John Hancock, the first to sign the Declaration of Independence, Richard Henry Lee, who formally introduced the resolution to declare independence to the Continental Congress, and Samuel Adams, who led the Boston Tea Party. Also joining them were Mason, Gerry, and Randolph, the dissenters at the convention. Of the writings produced by the Anti-Federalists, the most circulated was "Hon. Mr. Gerry's Objections," which focused mainly on the lack of a bill of rights. Another Anti-Federalist, writing under the pseudonym, "Brutus," observed that the Constitution explicitly forbade suspending habeas corpus, or passing bills of attainder or ex post facto laws, even though it never gives permission to the federal government to do any of these. He points out that this refutes the Federalist argument that if the Constitution does not allow the government to suspend people's rights, it need not declare that it is forbidden. Brutus writes that Federalists May be insisting on excluding a bill of rights so they can subjugate the people. Even Thomas Jefferson wrote to Madison that "Half a loaf is better than no bread. If we cannot secure all our rights, let us secure what we can."

States began ratifying the Constitution over the objections of the Anti-Federalists. The Constitution was popular among most of the small states, happy that they would be represented in the new federal government. Delaware, New Jersey, and Georgia all voted unanimously to ratify. The exception was Rhode Island, who had not even sent delegates to the convention and held out for over a year after the Constitution had gone into effect.

More divided were some of the larger states, like Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, North Carolina, Virginia, and New York. Though voting 46-23 in favor of ratification and being the second state to do so, the 23 dissenters were outspoken. They published a minority report that was widely read by Anti-Federalists. The Massachusetts legislature was dominated by Anti-Federalists. They debated for weeks, eventually agreeing to ratify on the condition that a bill of rights in the form of constitutional amendments be proposed later. This seemed like a good compromise to many Anti-Federalists, swinging the vote in favor of ratification in several more states. Virginia's convention was perhaps the most contentious. High-profile Federalists like James Madison, Edmund Randolph, and John Marshall debated against equally high-profile Anti-Federalists like Patrick Henry and George Mason. On June 21, 1788, the convention voted to ratify, 89-79. They decided just four days after New Hampshire, the ninth state to ratify. The Constitution had met the threshold to go into effect. New York, whose legislature was dominated by Anti-Federalists, was hesitant to ratify even with Massachusetts' suggested compromise. However, now that the Constitution had already been ratified by the requisite nine states, New York did not want to be left out of the new union, so agreed to ratify. On September 25, the Bill of Rights was approved by Congress and sent off to the states. North Carolina, seeing they were likely to be ratified, held another convention and ratified as well. Rhode Island held out until mid-1790, over a year after the new government went into effect.

1) Delaware (12/7/1787) - Slave
2) Pennsylvania (12/12/1787) - Free
3) New Jersey (12/18/1787) - Slave
4) Georgia (1/4/1788) - Slave
5) Connecticut (1/25/1788) - Free
6) Massachusetts (2/6/1788) - Free
7) Maryland (4/28/1788) - Slave
8) South Carolina (5/23/1788) - Slave
9) New Hampshire (6/21/1788) - Free

--------------------Constitution ratified--------------------

10) Virginia (6/25/1788) - Slave
11) New York (7/26/1788) - Slave
12) North Carolina (11/21/1789) - Slave
13) Rhode Island (5/29/1790) - Free

Overall, 5 free states and 8 slave states joined the new country. States were also assigned a number denoting what order they ratified the Constitution (eg Delaware was the 1st state). All other states to join the US would be given a number in the same manner.


Title: New Hampshire ratifies the Constitution
Description: 


Title: Virginia ratifies the Constitution
Description: 


Title: New York ratifies the Constitution
Description: 


Title: New York City set as the US capitol
Description: 


Title: Election of 1788-89
Description: Though the Constitution was not officially to go into effect until March 4, 1789, the government still needed to be elected before they could convene. George Washington was by far the favorite to win. In fact, it seemed the only person who didn't want him to be president was Washington himself. After leading a six-year war, and presiding over the convention to create the new and hopefully long-lasting government, Washington was content to retire to his estate at Mount Vernon. But Americans strongly wanted Washington to be their first president, hoping that he would bring stability and union into the new government. Washington reluctantly accepted, knowing he was going to be elected regardless. Indeed, no one ran against him, and when the Electoral College's votes were counted, he had received unanimous support.

Under the Constitution's rules, every Electoral College delegate had two votes. The person who won the most votes became president, and the runner-up became vice president. Every delegate cast one of his votes for Washington. A few other candidates received some vote, but not counting Washington, John Adams of Massachusetts won a plurality, 34 out of 69. Interestingly, since at this point North Carolina and Rhode Island had not ratified the Constitution, they were ineligible to send delegates. New York also refrained from voting due to being unable to select electoral delegates in time.

Main issues: none
Turnout: 11.6%
Significance: First presidential election
First election in which the victor won every state

Electoral Votes:
George Washington (I): 69
John Adams (F): 34
John Jay (F): 9
Robert H. Harrison (F): 6
John Rutledge (F): 6
John Hancock (F): 4
George Clinton (A-F): 3
Samuel Huntington (F): 2
John Milton (F): 2
James Armstrong (F): 1
Benjamin Lincoln (F): 1
Edward Telfair (A-F): 1


Title: <i>The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano</i>
Description: <i>The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, Or Gustavus Vassa, The African</i> was published in England. It was an autobiography of Olaudah Equiano, an African who was kidnapped by slave traders when he was 11 years old, sometime in the mid-1750s. Equiano was brought on board a slave ship and shipped to Barbados. Shortly thereafter, he was purchased by a British sea captain who named his Gustavus Vassa. He fought as a soldier in the Seven Years' War and had enough money in 1766 to buy his way out of slavery. In his book, Equiano reminds the reader that white people were once uncivilized like the Africans, but that did not make them inferior. He asserts that all races could become more intellectual and civilized, and so Africans did not deserve to be enslaved. To support this notion, the front cover of the book is Equiano in European clothing and holding a Bible, to suggest that Africans could become civilized like Europeans. The book is the best-known first-person account of a slave in the 18th century.


Title: Georgetown College, the first Catholic university in the US, is founded
Description: 


Title: <b>Constitution goes into effect</b>
Description: The Constitution was ratified in June of 1788. The document specified that once it was, it would go into effect by March 4 of the next year. This would give the country sufficient time to transition from the old government under the Articles of Confederation to the new one. On November 2, 1788, the federal government was mostly dissolved. Cyrus Griffin, president of Congress, resigned his post, and the vast majority of Congressmen did not show up to any more meetings. From December 1788 to January 1789, the country held its first election for the new government. It saw George Washington unanimously elected president, and John Adams elected vice president. On March 2, Congress met for the last time, although only one member Philip Pell, attended. He adjourned the Confederation Congress indefinitely.

On March 4, the day the Constitution went into effect, Congress adjourned for the first time. At this point, North Carolina and Rhode Island had not yet ratified the Constitution, so they did not send any representatives to Congress. Famous senators included Oliver Ellsworth of Connecticut, Rufus King of New York, William Paterson of New Jersey, Pierce Butler of South Carolina, and James Monroe and Richard Henry Lee of Virginia. Famous House members included Roger Sherman of Connecticut, Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts, and James Madison of Virginia. On April 1, the House reached its first quorum and elected its officers, the Senate doing the same five days later. Also on April 6, Congress certified the Electoral College ballots, formalizing Washington's and Adams' victories. Curiously, Adams was inaugurated as vice president on April 21, nine days before Washington's inauguration as president. Therefore, for nine days the US had a vice president but no president. On July 25, Charles Thomson, the last officer of the Confederation Congress, resigned gave the old government's seal to the new one, officially ending the Confederation. The Supreme Court would not meet for the first time until February 2, 1790.


Title: <i>Gazette of the United States</i> founded
Description: 


Title: <b>George Washington's first inauguration</b>
Description: 


Title: Washington Administration
Description: President: George Washington
Number: 1
Party: None (sometimes considered to be Federalist)
Home State: Virginia
Vice President: John Adams (F)
Secretary of State: Thomas Jefferson (D-R)
Secretary of Treasury: Alexander Hamilton (F)

Prior Occupations: 
VA Burgess (1761-1776)
Commander-in-Chief of the Continental Army (1775-1783)

Congress Majority Parties (Senate / House):
1st Congress: Federalist / Federalist
2nd Congress: Federalist / Federalist
3rd Congress: Federalist / Democratic-Republican
4th Congress: Federalist / Democratic-Republican

Chief Justice: John Jay (1789 - 1795)
John Rutledge (1795)
Oliver Ellsworth (1796 - 1797)

Notable Qualities:
First president
First president to be re-elected
Only president to be elected unanimously (and did so twice)
First independent president
Administration with the most chief justices
Established many traditions, such as the two-term limit, a presidential cabinet, and multiple Supreme Court justices


Title: French Revolution
Description: The French Revolution was a widespread upheaval of France's political and social order by its lower class, the Third Estate. Prior to this, France was particularly monarchical and aristocratic, even by European standards. The Third Estate had virtually no power, they were taxed heavily, and struggled to get by, while the royal family and upper classes threw one extravagant party after another. A steady worsening of the Third Estate's relations with the upper classes combined with a famine spurred the people into action. For three years they wrestled for control with the French monarchy.

Just over ten years prior, France had joined the nascent United States in fighting Great Britain. Their support was instrumental to Americans securing their independence. Americans had not forgotten this and many still favored strong relations with France. Therefore, when the monarchy appeared to be on the verge of being overthrown by a republic, many Americans were enthusiastic. They saw that their revolution was spreading, even to Europe. More and more people could enjoy republican principles. Among the revolution's biggest American supporters was Thomas Jefferson, who was serving as the US Minister to France at the time. Jefferson worked with his old friend, the Maquis de Lafayette, who had served as a major general in the Revolutionary War. They produced the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, outlining the French people's inalienable rights. The Declaration was adopted by the National Assembly on August 26, 1789.

However, things would soon take a turn for the worse. French revolutionary fervor became too powerful. The guillotine, an execution device designed to give a quick and humane death regardless of class or stature, became the solution to even minor infractions. During the so-called Reign of Terror from 1793-94, the government began sending people to the guillotine for seemingly no reason. On January 21, 1793, former King Louis XVI was put to death, and nine months later, so was his wife, former Queen Marie Antoinette. Many Americans were shocked. Sure, the king had acted tyrannically, but executing a king and queen was serious business. Combined with the flurry of civilian executions, some began feeling like the Revolution had got out of hand. Among the biggest skeptics was US Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton. Hamilton favored strong relations with Great Britain, which would necessitate alienating Great Britain's old foe, France. Hamilton supported a strong, central government, and a society run by the aristocracy. He saw the chaos of the French Revolution as proof of what would happen if the masses were allowed to run the country. Joining him were Vice President John Adams and Acting Secretary of State John Jay. In 1795, Jay negotiated a treaty with Great Britain, strengthening their bonds, and alienating France in the process. Adams supported the treaty, which was signed and ratified. Jefferson and his allies were not willing to abandon France. Though the executions had gotten out of hand, their reasons for supporting the Revolution still stood. They hated Jay's Treaty, which they felt abandoned their old friend in favor of their old enemy, and damaged American sovereignty. The French Revolution would produce a schism in American politics, and the formation of unofficial political parties, Hamilton's Federalists and Jefferson's Republicans. Relations with Revolutionary France continued to sour during Adams' tenure as president. The two countries entered an undeclared naval war, called the Quasi-War, for a year. In 1799, the Revolution collapsed as Napoleon Bonaparte seized control of the country.


Title: Presidential title set as "Mr. President"
Description: In April of 1789, in one of the Senate's first debates, Senator Richard Henry Lee of Virginia motioned to discuss the official presidential title. Vice President John Adams took part in the debate. One of the few constitutional duties provided to the vice president was to preside over the Senate. As such, Adams would show up to Senate meetings frequently and engage in the discussions, though he was not allowed to vote unless to break a tie. Adams favored an esteemed title for the president like "His Highness." He believed the country's highest office deserved some "dignity and splendor." Some senators wanted a lesser but still honorable title like "His Excellency." Many others thought this entire debate was a waste of time. They thought these titles made the president sound too much like a king, and May even violate the constitutional ban of titles of nobility. Adams disagreed, saying that it was not a real title of nobility, with associated powers and privileges, but merely a way of referring to the president. Thomas Jefferson, though not a senator, called the whole notion "superlatively ridiculous." On May 14, the Senate settled on the humble "Mr. President."

During the debate, Adams would lecture the Senate at length. His stubborn and combative attitude earned him the Senate's ire. William Maclay of Pennsylvania characterized him as "a monkey just put into breeches." President pro tempore of the Senate, Ralph Izard of South Carolina, joked that Adams should be called "His Rotundity," a nickname that stuck. Adams later wrote that perhaps he had been out of the country for so long that he had become out of touch to his people's sentiments. Incidents like this damaged his reputation with both friends and enemies.


Title: First federal law passed under the Constitution
Description: The first federal law established the oath Congressmen now had to swear to take office. They were to swear, "I, <name>, a Representative of the United States in Congress thereof, do solemnly swear or affirm (as the case May be) that I will support the Constitution of the United States." It passed the House on April 27, and the Senate on May 5, with the change that state officials and legislators be required to take a similar oath. President Washington signed the bill into law on June 1.


Title: Tariff of 1789
Description: The Tariff of 1789 was the first tariff passed under the Constitution, as well as the first major piece of legislation. One of the main powers Congress had under the Constitution that it didn't before was to implement tariffs. It was added because of the dire straits the US economy had been in since the start of the Revolutionary War. After the war, matters were made worse by a series of unequal trade agreements made with Europe. Great Britain passed a series of Navigation Acts banning non-British ships from ports in the West Indies, imposing heavy dues on American goods elsewhere, banning the importation of American goods from foreign islands. Spain insisted that in return for reciprocal trade relations, the US surrender navigation rights along the Mississippi River for 25 years. Portugal refused outright to trade with Americans. The Netherlands and even America's old ally, France, signed unequal trade agreements. Only Sweden and Prussia, who were minor trading partners, guaranteed reciprocal trade deals with the US.

The Confederation Congress could do little to stop or counter these agreements, having been made impotent by its constitution. States attempted retaliatory measures individually, but their inconsistency meant that trade partners like the British could simply go to ports where import duties were lowest and flood the market with cheap goods, which would be moved across state lines to flood their markets as well.

Once Congress convened for the first time, they received numerous petitions from Northern merchants asking for a protective tariff. Alexander Hamilton was its strongest supporter. He recognized the nascent industrial capabilities of the North, but at the moment they were not developed enough to compete with European rivals. A tariff would encourage Americans to buy domestically, promoting the country's industrial growth and allowing it to one day compete without it. James Madison introduced the tariff to the House of Representatives, imposing a 5% duty fee on most goods, and higher charges, up to 50%, on certain goods, including steel, tobacco, salt, cloth, and indigo. American ships were charged less than foreign ones. 

The tariff was not incredibly popular. The merchants did not support it as much as Hamilton had hoped, and Southern farmers disliked it for raising prices for their purchased goods. Nevertheless, tariffs would continue for nearly all of American history, and for most of its existence made of the vast majority of federal revenue.


Title: <b>Department of Foreign Affairs established</b>
Description: Article II, Section 2 of the Constitution gives the president various responsibilities, and empowers Congress to create executive departments to help him carry them out. The first such organization was the Department of Foreign Affairs, created to handle relations with foreign nations. In September that year, it was renamed to the State Department. It was headed by the newly-created office of Secretary of State, first filled by Thomas Jefferson. Initially, the State Department was responsible for various things later delegated to other departments, including managing the US Mint and running the national census. Since its inception, the Secretary of State has been regarded as one of the most important positions in the US government.


Title: US Customs Service estabished
Description: The US Customs Service was an organization under the Treasury Department, created to collect import duties and other border security matters. Most immediately, it was created to collect the recently passed tariff, the first federal tariff in US history. For over a century, the Customs Service provided nearly 90% of the federal government's revenue, funding historic undertakings like the various land purchases (Louisiana, Alaska, etc), infrastructure projects (National Road, Transcontinental Railroad, etc), the building of Washington, DC, and much more. In the 20th century, the Customs Service took on law enforcement as a role. In 2003, parts of the Customs Service and various other organizations were merged to form US Customs and Border Protection. Other parts went to forming US Immigration and Customs Enforcement.


Title: <b>Department of War established</b>
Description: The War Department was the second executive department created under the Constitution. It was responsible for handling the US Army, though not the Navy. Until 1849, the War Department also handled relations with American Indians. The first Secretary of War was Henry Knox, formal senior general in the Continental Army and Secretary of War under the Congress of the Confederation. In 1947, it was reorganized as the Department of the Army under the newly-created Department of Defense.


Title: <b>Department of the Treasury established</b>
Description: The Department of the Treasury was the third federal executive department, this one for managing the country's finances. President Washington's first pick for Secretary of the Treasury was Robert Morris, former Superintendant of Finance of the United States. However, Morris declined, and suggested Alexander Hamilton, former Congressman in the Confederation and founder of the Bank of New York in his stead. Washington accepted, and Hamilton was sworn in as the first Secretary of the Treasury.


Title: <b>Judiciary Act of 1789</b>
Description: The Judiciary Act of 1789 is a law establishing the federal judicial branch and the office of Attorney General. It was primarily authored by Senator Oliver Ellsworth of Connecticut. The Constitution gave the federal judiciary only in general terms. It created a Supreme Court, whose size was to be determined by Congress, as well as a number of inferior courts, also determined by Congress. 

The Judiciary Act set the Supreme Court's size at six justices: one chief justice and five associate justices. It had jurisdiction over all civil cases between states, or between a state and the federal government, and those against ambassadors and other diplomats. Thirteen districts were created among the eleven states (North Carolina and Rhode Island had yet to ratify the Constitution). Massachusetts had one district for modern-day Massachusetts, and one for modern-day Maine. Virginia had one for modern-day Kentucky, and one for modern-day Virginia and West Virginia. The other nine states got one district. A circuit court and district court was created in every district. District courts had one judge, and were mainly responsible for petty crimes. Circuit courts were responsible for serious crimes. They had a district judge (so every state had only one or two federal judges) and two Supreme Court justices "riding circuit," meaning that the two had to travel to the district to hear the case. In those days, there were few roads, and it often took a long time for the justices to travel. This system mostly held until the Judiciary Act of 1891, which mostly replaced the circuit courts with the courts of appeals. The circuit courts would continue until 1912, when Congress abolished them with the Judicial Code of 1911, and circuit riding along with them.

If one felt that they did not receive a fair judgment in a district court, they could appeal to the higher circuit court. Through this system, the circuit court is said to have appelate jurisdiction. Similarly, the Supreme Court had appelate jurisdiction over circuit court decisions. This created the judicial hierarchy that still exists today, though the circuit courts have been replaced with courts of appeals.

The Supreme Court had the power to review decisions concerning federal law by state courts. Also, citizens of one state sued by citizens of another state could "remove" the case to the local federal circuit court. These two powers established the power of federal courts over state courts.

The act also created some new offices outside of judges. Each district received a federal attorney, whose job is to represent the federal government in court. Each district also got a federal marshal, who worked under the newly-created US Marshals Service. They protect judicial workers, manage criminal assets, run the federal witness protection program, among other things. Finally, it created the office of Attorney General. Though today, the attorney general heads the Justice Department, in 1789 no such department existed. His stated job was to advise the president on legal matters, and to represent the federal government in front of the Supreme Court.

Notably, one of the most famous powers of the Supreme Court, that of judicial review, was not delegated to it either in the Constitution or in the Judiciary Act. This would be determined by the Court itself in the 1803 Marbury v. Madison decision.

Once President Washington signed the law, he appointed officials to the new positions. He appointed John Jay as chief justice, Edmund Randoplh as attorney general, and John Rutledge, William Cushing, James Iredell (his original choice, Robert Harrison, declined the offer), James Wilson, and John Blair Jr. as associate justices.

This act was one of the most important passed by the 1st Congress and Washington, as it established the entire federal judiciary system. Most of what it created remains to this day.


Title: First regular army established
Description: On September 29, 1789, the last day of Congress's first session, it passed "An act to recognize and adapt to the Constitution of the United States, the establishment of the troops raised under the resolves of the United States in Congress assembled." It officially created a standing army. In reality, the army already existed, but it was a small force left over from the Continental Army that disbanded after the Revolutionary War ended. Congress was reluctant to handle the issue of a standing army. They were already occupied with setting up the federal government, like creating executive departments and lower courts. Additionally, many Americans were suspicious of standing armies because of their experience with British troops in the lead-up to the Revolutionary War. They delayed handling it until Secretary of War Henry Knox, then President Washington appealed to them. They pointed out that a standing army was necessary to deal with constant threats from Indians on the frontier. However, it would be until 1792 that an army was actually organized. At Fort Lafayette, PA, Major General "Mad" Anthony Wayne led the newly-created Legion of the United States until his death in 1796. The Legion was taken over by Brigadier General James Wilkinson and renamed to the United States Army.


Title: First Catholic bishop appointed to the US
Description: John Carroll was the first Catholic bishop in the United States.


Title: North Carolina ratifies the Constitution
Description: North Carolina was one of the few states that had rejected the Constitution during the ratification debates of 1787-88. The convention at Hillsborough primarily objected to a lack of a bill of rights, a common complaint among Anti-Federalists. The Federalists, outnumbered 2-1 at the convention, decided to record and publish the debate to use to persuade North Carolinians to ratify later. The most outspoken of these Federalists were James Iredell, who would become a Supreme Court Justice in 1790, and William R. Davie, who founded the University of North Carolina.  In 1789, the Constitution came into effect without North Carolina, effectively leaving the state independent. This would only last for a few months, though. In September 1789, the Bill of Rights passed Congress. Seeing that enough states were sure to ratify them, North Carolinians became more confident that their rights would be protected. Also, the wealthy northeastern portion of the state, which was more Federalist, threatened to secede and join the Union if North Carolina did not ratify. A second convention was held at Fayetteville, and this time they voted to ratify, becoming the 12th state to do so.


Title: First official Thanksgiving holiday observed
Description: Both thanksgivings and harvest festivals are very old traditions, though they were usually not celebrated every year. It was celebrated in Jamestown in 1607, and more famously by the Pilgrims in 1621. Various colonies throughout 17th and 18th centuries observed days of thanksgiving. In mid-1789, Congress introduced a resolution to ask President Washington to proclaim a day of thanksgiving that year. Some Anti-Administration Congressmen objected, concerned that the religious nature of Thanksgiving would violate the separation of church and state. Such detractors were in the minority in Congress, though, and it passed. On October 3, 1789, Washington proclaimed that year's November 26 to be a day of thanksgiving. Days of Thanksgiving would be proclaimed individually and irregularly for the next few decades. Some presidents opposed the idea and did not declare any. Among them was Thomas Jefferson, a deist and a strong believer in separating church and state. Every year since 1863 has celebrated Thanksgiving Day.


Title: First State of the Union address
Description: Article II, Section 3 of the Constitution states that the president "shall from time to time give to the Congress Information of the State of the Union, and recommend to their Consideration such Measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient." George Washington delivered his first such message to Congress in person. He would deliver one every year, which every president after him has followed. Thomas Jefferson simply wrote his speeches and sent them to Congress, having a clerk read them instead. Jefferson's approach lasted until 1913, when Woodrow Wilson once again began giving the speeches in person. Today, the State of the Union address is delivered by the president in person in front of all of Congress and many other high-ranking government officials, which is broadcast nationwide. When it started, it was simply called "the President's Annual Message to Congress."

The actual speech was relatively short compared to later addresses, less than 1000 words. Washington observed the improving state of the country. North Carolina had just joined the Union, the national credit and "respectability" was increasing, and the federal government was beginning to earn the people's support. He suggested the need to raise a larger army to defend against Indian attacks on the frontier. He also recommended an act concerning naturalization of foreigners into US citizens, one concerning foreign intercourse, one concerning the uniformity of currency, weights, and measures, the creation of a post office and post roads, promotion of agriculture, commerce, and manufactures, and a copyright law. Congress would act on all of these within the next few years.


Title: Alexander Hamilton's <i>Report on Public Credit</i>
Description: Alexander Hamilton, recently confirmed as the first US Secretary of the Treasury, had a strongly-held vision of the layout of the US economy to come. As such, when Congress began commissioning him to write economic reports, he jumped at the opportunity. On September 21, 1789, the House of Representatives requested Hamilton write the first of what would be four reports, this one on public credit. On January 9, 1790, about four months later, Hamilton presented his 40,000-word First Report on the Public Credit.

He first establishes that there will always be a need to borrow, especially in times of public danger. At the moment, the USA had little wealth to its name, so establishing good credit is vital. He writes that

"among ourselves the most enlightened friends of good government are those, whose expectations are the highest. To justify and preserve their confidence; to promote the encreasing respectability of the American name; to answer the calls of justice; to restore landed property to its due value; to furnish new resources both to agriculture and commerce; to cement more closely the union of the states; to add to their security against foreign attack; to establish public order on the basis of an upright and liberal policy. These are the great and invaluable ends to be secured, by a proper and adequate provision, at the present period, for the support of public credit."

"It is a well kown fact, that in countries in which the national debt is properly funded, and an object of established confidence, it answers most of the purposes of money. Transfers of stock or public debt ae there equivalent to payments in specie; or in other words, stock, in the principal transactions of business, passes current as specie. The same things would, in all probability happen here, under the like circumstances. The benefits of this are various and obvious. First. Trade is extended by it; because there is a larger capital to carry it on, and the merchant can at the same time, afford to trade for smaller profits; as his stock, which, when unemployed, brings him in an interest from the government, serves him also as money, when he has a call for it in his commercial operations. Secondly. Agriculture and manufactures are also promoted by it: For the like reason, that more capital can be commanded to be employed in both; and because the merchant, whose enterprize in foreign trade, gives to them activity and extension, has greater means for enterprize. Thirdly. The interest of money will be lowered by it; for this is always in a ratio, to the quantity of money, and to the quickness of circulation. This circumstance will enable both the public and individuals to borrow on easier and cheaper terms. And from the combination of these effects, additional aids will be furnished to labour, to industry, and to arts of every kind."

He says that "a funded debt" would solve the dramatic drop in cultivated land values. He cites that in most of the country, it had fallen from 25-50%, even more in the South.

He then discusses how to build the country's credit.


Title: Pennsylvania Abolition Society petitions Congress to abolish slavery
Description: 


Title: Naturalization Act of 1790
Description: Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution grants Congress the power to set uniform laws of naturalization, or the process of foreigners becoming US citizens. President Washington reminded the legislature in his first annual message to Congress that the country still had none, as that was a power not granted to Congress under the previous government.

The Naturalization Act set a two-year residency requirement in the US, as well as one year in the state the foreigner applied for citizenship in. For example, a foreigner living in New York would have to have lived in the US for two years and New York for one year. They would then file a petition with a local court, who would evaluate their "good character." If they pass, the foreigner would then take an oath or affirmation to support the Constitution. They, as well as their children over 21, would then officially become citizens both of the US and of the state they applied in. Children born to two US citizens outside US territory would also be considered "natural born citizens." Only a "free white person" was eligible to be naturalized.

Compared to later naturalization acts, this one is short. New rules would be added, but the residency requirement (though the length would change), swearing an oath or affirmation, and children being natural-born citizens when born abroad to American parents would remain.


Title: North Carolina cedes its western half to Congress
Description: 


Title: Patent Act of 1790
Description: Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution empowered Congress to promote the arts and sciences by granting patents to inventors. It created a Patent Board, composed of the Secretary of State, Secretary of War, and Attorney General. An inventor of "any useful art, manufacture, engine, machine, or device, or any improvement therein not before known or used," could petition the Board for a patent. The Board could then grant a patent for up to fourteen years. The first Patent Board comprised Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson, Secretary of War Henry Knox, and Attorney General Edmund Randolph. They granted 57 patents until 1793, when a second patent act was passed.


Title: Benjamin Franklin dies
Description: On April 17, 1790, Benjamin Franklin died of a lung inflammation at his home in Philadelphia at age 84. He was one of America's most celebrated Founding Fathers. He was a polymath, spending his time as a writer, scientist, statesman, publisher, among others. 

Perhaps his most significant contribution to the world was his research on electricity. He was the first (though British scientist William Watson observed this independently the same year) to discover that there were two types of electricity, which he called "positive" and "negative." Franklin is probably most famous for his kite experiment, which he wrote about in his newspaper. It involved flying a kite during a storm, waiting for a lightning bolt to hit it, then collect some of the residue. It wa meant to prove that lightning was made of electricity. It is unknown whether he performed the experiment himself, though French scientist Thomas-Francois Dalibard did so himself the same year Franklin wrote about it. He also invented the lightning rod, which is used extensively today to protect buildings from lightning strikes.

Franklin's largest contribution to the American Revolution was as a publisher. He ran the Pennsylvania Gazette, a large newspaper that ran in the largest city in the colonies. The Gazette was usually among the first to break important events about the Revolution, like the Boston Tea Party and the outbreak of the war. In those days of slow communication, newspapers were critical for sharing information among those who did not live right near where an event happened.

Franklin supplemented his wealth with further writing. His most famous piece of literature is the Poor Richard's Almanack, a collection of advice and sayings in a catchy format. He wrote them under a pseudonym, Poor Richard Saunders. Many of the sayings are still famous today, such as "early to bed, early to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise." He later admitted that much of the work was not original, stating that "not one tenth was my own." However, he had rewritten many of the sayings to be more catchy, so those are the versions that live on today. His writings, along with his newspaper, made him one of the richest Americans at the time.

His accomplishments as a statesman were numerous as well. In 1754, he presented the Plan of Union to the Albany Convention, advocating for a government to unite the colonies. It was the first suggestion of its kind, though it was rejected. To promote the idea, Franklin created the "Join, or Die" snake, considered the first political cartoon in America. He spent two decades as Postmaster General of British America. During the Revolution, he served as the United States Minister to France, helping to improve relations with their ally during and after the war. He was elected as President of Pennsylvania (essentially the governor) and served for three one-year terms, the constitutional maximum. As one of his last contributions, he attended the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, and signed the final document, though his presence was largely ceremonial and he debated little. He was the only person to sign the Declaration of Independence, Treaty of Alliance with France, Treaty of Paris with Great Britain, and the Constitution.

Finally, Franklin founded several institutions. In 1727, he created the Junto, a philosophy and reading club. Four years later, he created the Library Company of Philadelphia, to provide the books for the Junto and everyone else. In 1736, he created the Union Fire Company, Pennsylvania's first fire department. In 1751, he created what became the University of Pennsylvania, now a highly-prestigious university and part of the Ivy League.

Like so many other Founding Fathers, Franklin both owned slaves and spoke out against the practice. He owned around half a dozen himself, and posted advertisements asking for their recapture when some escaped. In the late 1750s and early 1760s, Franklin became more abolitionist. In 1774, he and Benjamin Rush founded the Pennsylvania Abolitionist Society, one of the largest contemporary abolitionist groups in the country. He and others sent petitions to Congress asking to abolish slavery, but was rebuffed. His will required his daughter and son-in-law to free his remaining slaves.

As one of the most venerated Founding Fathers, Franklin has many monuments to his legacy. Most famously, his face has been on the $100 bill since 1928. The Franklin Institute, a scientific research facility in Philadelphia, bears both his name and a 20-foot marble statue of him.


Title: Crimes Act of 1790
Description: 


Title: Southwest Territory organized
Description: 


Title: Rhode Island ratifies the Constitution
Description: 


Title: Copyright Act of 1790
Description: 


Title: Compromise of 1790
Description: A deal between Alexander Hamilton of the Federalist Party and James Madison and Thomas Jefferson of the Democratic-Republican Party. After Hamilton's Economic Plan was proposed, the Federalists were unable to get it passed (specifically, the act of the federal government assuming all state debts). The three met together over dinner to discuss terms for its passage. They decided to pass the Funding Act of 1790 (which did as Hamilton wanted), but was packaged along with the Residence Act, which mandated that a permanent national capital be established along the Potomac River. This capital was eventually determined to be the Washington District of Columbia (Washington DC), located on the border of Maryland and Virginia, two pro-slavery states. Hamilton agreed to this plan because he figured the more important capital of the country would not be the political one, but the economic one, ie New York City. He correctly predicted that NYC would be the thriving economic center of the Union throughout its existence.


Title: Thomas Jefferson's <i>Plan for Establishing Uniformity in the Coins, Weights, and Measures of the United States</i>
Description: 


Title: <b>Residence Act</b>
Description: Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution grants Congress the power to create a federal district to hold the federal government. It had previously been located in Philadelphia, and was moved to New York City in 1788. These were only temporary, and the plan had always been to permanently relocate to a special district. The idea was that placing the capital in a state would give that state undue influence in the federal government, and the country had agreed that all states were to have equal standing.

Where that district would be was a matter of debate. Though a state would have to give up some of their land, its proximity would still give it some influence. As such, most states were more than willing to lose a few square miles to have the district in or next to their territory. In 1789, Congress debated the federal district's location. In September 1789, the House approved a bill to place it on the Potomac River near Georgetown, Maryland. Around the same time, the Senate approved a bill placing it on the Delaware River near Germantown, Pennsylvania (the northwest part of Philadelphia). The chambers were unable to reconcile the two and the plan fell apart. The main divide was between the North and the South, neither of whom was willing to concede the district to the other.

They tried once more in mid-1790. Representative James Madison and Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson (not in Congress, but influential), who favored the Potomac spot, met with Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, also influential in Congress. Hamilton agreed to back the Potomac location if Jefferson and Madison would support his plan to have the federal government assume state debts. They agreed. Hamilton attempted to work Congress, especially the New York delegations, to back the creation of the Potomac district, called the Residence Act.

Even still, the vote was narrow. Every New England Congressman except Senator Paine Wingate (NH) voted against. Every New York Congressman also voted against, apparently unconvinced by Hamilton. Every Pennsylvania, Delaware, North Carolina, Georgia and Virginia Congressmen voted in favor, except Senator William Few (GA). Most Maryland Congressmen voted in favor, most South Carolinians against, and New Jersey exactly divided, in both houses. From this, we can see the strongest support was from the Upper South, where the district would be located. Pennsylvania also supported it, since it provided to make Philadelphia the temporary capital for ten years until the district was ready. The strongest opposition came from New England and New York, who likely hoped for a capital in their area. Nevertheless, it narrowly passed, 14-12 in the Senate on July 1, and the House 31-29 on July 9. Washington signed the Residence Act into law on July 16. It was also signed by Vice President John Adams (President of the Senate) and Speaker of the House Frederick Muhlenberg.

The Residence Act created a square of territory, ten miles aside for a total area of 100 square miles, on the Potomac River. Specifically, it laid "some place between the mouths of the Eastern-Branch and Connogochegue," branches of the river. The president would appoint three commissioners to survey and demarcate the land. Those commissioners were then to construct buildings for Congress, the president, and "the public offices of the government of the United States," to be finished on the first Monday in December 1800, over ten years from then. Until then, the capital would be at Philadelphia and the land that would go into the district would still be governed by Maryland's or Virginia's respective laws.


Title: Indian Nonintercourse Act of 1790
Description: 


Title: Census of 1790
Description: Article I, Section 2 of the Constitution requires that the population of states be reevaluated every ten years, to keep their proportional representation in the House updated. To that end, a national census was conducted, counting up people from every state. The Census Bureau, which would become in charge of taking the census, was not created until the early 20th century. The 1790 census was conducted by the fifteen federal marshals, one from every state, plus one for the District of Maine in Massachusetts and one for the District of Kentucky in Virginia.

National population
3.9 million total
701,000 slaves (17.8% of total population)

State populations
1) Virginia 821,000 (74,000 of which were in modern-day Kentucky)
2) Massachusetts 475,000 (97,000 of which were in modern-day Maine)
3) Pennsylvania 434,000
4) North Carolina 394,000
5) New York 340,000
6) Maryland 320,000
7) South Carolina 249,000
8) Connecticut 238,000
9) New Jersey 184,000
10) New Hampshire 142,000
11) Georgia 83,000
12) Rhode Island 69,000
13) Delaware 59,000

The top four states together were over half the country's population, with Virginia alone being over 20%.

State slave populations (% of state population)
1) Virginia 305,000 (37.1%)
2) South Carolina 107,000 (43.0%)
3) Maryland 103,000 (32.2%)
4) North Carolina 101,000 (25.5%)
5) Georgia 29,000 (35.5%)
6) New York 21,000 (6.3%)
7) New Jersey 11,000 (6.2%)
8) Delaware 8900 (15.0%)
9) Pennsylvania 3800 (0.9%)
10) Connecticut 2800 (1.2%)
11) Rhode Island 948 (1.4%)
12) New Hampshire 158 (0.1%)
13) Massachusetts 0 (0%)


Over 1/3 of people in South Carolina, Virginia, and Georgia were enslaved. Massachusetts was the only state with zero slaves, though the autonomous republic of Vermont also had zero. Overall, 17.8% of the US population was enslaved, the highest in the nation's history.


Title: Funding Act of 1790
Description: In his First Report on Public Credit in early 1790, Alexander Hamilton wrote of the need to establish a good credit for the US government. The government would therefore need to go into debt to pay it off. He thought a good way was to have the federal government assume old debts. The Constitution held the new government responsible for the old Confederation's debts, then $52 million. Hamilton wanted to extend that to debts accrued by the states during the Revolutionary War, amounting to an extra $25 million. Not only would national credit increase, but unity between the states would foster as well. The problem was that Southern states (excluding South Carolina) had already paid off most of their debts, while the ones with the highest debts were all Northern. Southerners saw this as Hamilton favoring the North over the South and refused to pass the bill. It was passed after Hamilton and Jefferson negotiated to move the federal capital to the South in exchange.


Title: US Revenue-Cutter Service established
Description: 


Title: Tariff of 1790
Description: 


Title: Northwest Confederacy defeats Colonel John Hardin
Description: 


Title: Slater's Mill
Description: Sometime in December 1790, Samuel Slater ("the father of the American Industrial Revolution") opened his first textile mill, marking the beginning of the Market Revolution. He mainly employed young single women, as he could get away with paying them less. The women also benefited by getting new work in the public sphere.


Title: Treaty of Holston
Description: 


Title: First National Bank
Description: The National Bank was a private, profitable corporation that would act on behalf of the federal government. The National Bank would store the federal government's money and print a national currency to be used by every state. It would have a 20-year charter, and would have certain restrictions placed on it to dissuade corruption, such as preventing it from purchasing government bonds. This was also highly controversial, with Southern Republicans like Thomas Jefferson and James Madison arguing that the establishment of the Bank was unconstitutional, robbed power from state banks, and served only to further the interests of the industrial North while providing no real benefit to the agrarian South. Hamilton cited the Elastic Clause as justification, claiming that it indirectly gave the government the right to create a national bank. This was an example of loose construction, the view that the Constitution granted the federal government powers not explicitly stated. The charter passed on February 25, 1791.


Title: Thomas Paine's <i>Rights of Man</i>
Description: 


Title: Excise tax on whiskey
Description: An excise tax on whiskey was another economic policy pushed by Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton. He hoped this would raise money for the government and discourage Americans from drinking excessively. Poor farmers objected to this tax, as many of them turned their excess grain into whiskey, which they then sold for a profit. The tax would hurt them financially even more. They grew so upset that a group of them in Pennsylvania took up arms in an event known as the Whiskey Rebellion that was suppressed by the military.


Title: Vermont becomes a state
Description: Vermont (VT) joined the US as the 6th free state and the 14th state overall.


Title: <i>West v. Barnes</i>
Description: 


Title: Haitian Revolution
Description: 


Title: Robert Carter III begins the largest manumission of slaves in North American history
Description: 


Title: Whiskey Rebellion
Description: A rebellion by Western Pennsylvanian farmers in protest of the 1791 whiskey tax. Alexander Hamilton had orchestrated the passage of the text in order to promote revenue for the federal government and discourage Americans from drinking too much hard liquor. However, poor farmers depended on the sale of whiskey (which they converted from the grain they grew). They argued that Hamilton had essentially placed an income tax exclusively on farmers, as wealthy Easterners were barely affected by it. They became so upset that a group of them took up arms in protest. Many of them were war veterans that believed they were protesting for the same values as in the American Revolution, specifically no taxation without representation. Hamilton and other proponents of the tax countered by claiming that they did have representation in the government directly through the House of Representatives, who approved the tax. Nevertheless, the farmers began attacking federal officials attempting to collect the tax. In July 1794, 500 armed farmers under the command of Major James McFarlane attacked the home of tax inspector General John Neville. President Washington, determined to put down the rebellion, sent both peace negotiators and a militia force of 13,000 to Pennsylvania. Washington himself led the force partway, making him the only president in US history to have led armed forces while in office. The militia force didn't arrive in time, as the rebels had already dispersed, resulting in no confrontation. 20 people were arrested, but all charges were dropped. The whiskey tax, however, remained arduous to collect, with many farmers dodging it. It was repealed in 1801 when Thomas Jefferson became president, who supported farmers and opposed Hamilton's policies. The Whiskey Rebellion can be seen as a post-Constitution counterpart to Shays' Rebellion, as both involved angry and poor farmers taking up arms against the government. The difference was that the Confederate government was unable to mobilize an armed force to suppress it, while the government under the Constitution was. This proved to the American people that having a stronger federal government was necessary to suppress the tyranny of mob rule.

Casualties:
3-4 Pennsylvanian rebels killed
170 Pennsylvanian rebels captured
~12 militiamen died from disease or accidents


Title: <i>National Gazette</i> founded
Description: 


Title: St. Clair's Defeat
Description: A battle fought in the Northwest Indian War between 1000 US soldiers and workers led by Major General Arthur St. Clair and 1100 Western Confederate warriors led by Little Turtle. The warriors ambushed the Americans, who were badly trained and not ready to fight in such conditions. The warriors thoroughly defeated the Americans, suffering only a few dozen casualties, while killing, wounding, or capturing almost all of St. Clair's men. Major General Richard Butler was one of the men killed in the engagement. It has been described as one of the US military's greatest defeats and one of the largest victories by Native Americans over a white country. However, the success would not last, as the Confederacy would surrender after their defeat at the Battle of Fallen Timbers. It also led to the first investigative hearings in Congress.

Casualties:
632 US soldiers killed or captured
264 US soldiers wounded
24 US workers killed,
13 US workers wounded

21 Western Confederate warriors killed
40 Western Confederate warriors wounded


Title: Alexander Hamilton's Report on Manufactures
Description: 


Title: <b>Bill of Rights</b>
Description: At the Constitutional Convention, delegates Edmund Randolph and George Mason of Virginia, and Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts, refused to sign the final product. Chief among their concerns was the lack of a bill of rights, a formal recognition and protection of the rights of the individual from the government. Bills of rights had a long precedent; England created one in 1689, and every state constitution included one. But their concerns were shot down by the rest of the convention. They claimed that since the Constitution did not allow the federal government to take away the people's rights, there was no need to forbid them, either. They also claimed that their rights were protected in state constitutions.

Though the idea was unpopular at the convention, it soon became the largest point of contention among so-called Anti-Federalists. Several states, starting with Massachusetts, would only agree to ratify if a bill of rights was added in the form of amendments. Though some Federalists continued to insist that a bill of rights was unnecessry or perhaps even dangerous, and some Anti-Federalists would not support the Constitution even with a bill of rights, most of the country eventually settled into a compromise. Because a bill of rights was so popular, a bill of rights was sure to pass quickly, assauging people's fears. By July 1788, only North Carolina and Rhode Island held out on ratifying the Constitution.

In the meantime, the other eleven states needed to elect representatives to the First Congress. James Madison, the most outspoken Federalist, planned on running in Virginia, but found himself in a gerrymandered district. The Virginia House of Delegates, who were responsible for drawing congressional district lines, was controlled by Patrick Henry and other Anti-Federalists. They were still sour over ratification, and tried to deny Madison a spot in Congress. Madison won anyway, promising that he would introduce the amendments to Congress himself. Madison claimed that he had come around on the issue, but in the margins for his notes for proposing the amendments to Congress he made his sentiments clear: "Bill of Rights -- useful -- not essential."

On June 8, 1789, Madison proposed nine amendments to the House of Representatives. They were primarily inspired by bills of rights from existing state constitutions, but also included material from the 1215 Magna Carta, the 1689 English Bill of Rights, and the 1776 Virginia Declaration of Rights. They included the following:

1) Add a preamble asserting that ultimate power is held within the people, that the government exists for their benefit, and that the people have the inalienable right to change the government if it is unable to fulfill its duties.

2) Modify Article I, Section 2, such that, instead of there being one Congressman for every 30,000 people, Congress can change the number of people per representative.

3) Add to Article !, Section 6, a line about changes in Congressmen's salaries not go into effect until after the next election.

4) Add to Article I, Section 9, various protections of civil rights. 
a) No national religion is to be established, and people's rights to religious freedom is protected.
b) People cannot be denied "their right to speak, to write, or to publish their sentiments," including the press.
c) People cannot be stopped from peaceably assembling or creating petitions to the government.
d) "The right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed." Also, "no person religiously scrupulous of bearing arms shall be compelled to render military service in person."
e) Soldiers cannot be quartered in people's homes in peacetime. 
f) People cannot be tried for the same offense twice, be compelled to testify against himself, be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process, or have his property taken through eminent domain without "just compensation." Excessive bail and fines, as well as cruel and unusual punishment are prohibited.
g) People are protected from unreasonable searches and seizures, 
h) People have "the right to a speedy and public trial, to be informed of the cause and nature of the accusation, to be confronted with his accusers, and the witnesses against him, to have a compulsory process for obtainin witnesses in his favor; and to have the assistance of counsel for his defence."
i) Specifying certain rights in the Constitution does not deny the existence of other rights, but "merely for greater caution."

5) Add to Article I, Section 10, that no state can violate the "equal rights of conscience, or the freedom of the press, or the trial by jury in criminal cases."

6) Add to Article III, Section 2, that appealing to federal courts not be allowed if the "value in controversy" does not reach some minimum amount. The actual amount is not specified, and is to be filled in by Congress during the ensuing debate. Also, no fact "triable by jury... be otherwise re-examinable than May consist with the principles of common law."

7) Modify Article III, Section 2, Clause 3, such that all criminal trials shall be determined by an impartial jury, requiring unanimity for conviction and "other accustomed requisites." Also, "all crimes punishable with loss of life or member" requires presentment or indictment of a grand jury.

8) Insert a new article after Article VI, to be called Article VII. The article formalizes the separation of powers, declaring that no branch can take on the powers of the others. Also, any powers not delegated to the federal government in the Constitution goes to the states.

9) Renumber the old Article VII as Article VIII.

These amendments were given to a House committee, who debated them for eleven days. Roger Sherman of Connecticut successfully proposed that the amendments be appended to the Constitution, instead of adding them alongside the original articles, as Madison had envisioned, so that the Constitution would "remain inviolate." The Federalists were concerned that too many amendments, especially ones made throughout the document, would appear to be a rewriting of the Constitution. This would suggest its instability, and diminish people's confidence in the new government. The House also believed that some of Madison's proposals ought to be broken up into separate amendments, since there was so much to them. A state might agree with one part of an amendment but not another. Particularly, the fourth proposal was broken up into approximately ten.

On August 24, the House approved the revised set of now-17 amendments, and sent them to the Senate. There, they were debated and changed further. They rejected Madison's proposal for a second preamble before the first, as they felt "We the People" concisely summarized the nature of the Constitution. They also rejected applying certain civil liberties protections to the states, feeling that it was in the jurisdiction of state constitutions. They approved the remaining amendments on September 9. Since both houses had modified the amendments, they now needed to agree together on a version. They sent up a join Conference Committee on September 21, who presented the final revised amendments, now twelve. Congress approved all twelve by joint resolution on September 25 and sent them off to the states to be ratified.

Not everyone was satisfied with the result, as usual, but overall the amendments were popular. The amendments were added to the Constitution in order they were ratified by the states. The first amendment to be approved by Congress, nicknamed the Congressional Apportionment Amendment, was never ratified. The second, relating to Congressional salaries, was not ratified at the time, and languished for over 200 years, before being revived and ratified as the 27th Amendment. The other ten were as follows:

1) Congress cannot restrict people's freedom of speech, religion, the press, peaceable assembly, or petition. Also, Congress cannot implement a national religion. The Senate approved this as two amendments, religious freedom and national religion in one and the rest in the other. The joint resolution condensed these two.

2) The right to "keep and bear arms shall not be infringed." Madison's line about banning people strongly opposed to bearing arms being prevented from being drafted was removed by the Senate.

3) Soldiers cannot be quartered in people's homes during peacetime. This was unchanged in every revision.

4) People are protected from unreasonable searches and seizures. This was unchanged in every revision.

5) People cannot be held for a "capital, or otherwise infamous crime" with a grand jury present or having indicted him. No one can be brought to court with the same accusation twice. No one can be compelled to testify against himself, "be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law." People's property taken via eminent domain must be fairly compensated. This was mostly unchanged from Madison's proposal, but in the line about grand juries, the Senate added a line excepting this in "cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia, when in actual service in time of war or public danger."

6) Defendants are entitled to a speedy and public trial, to be told the nature of the accusation against him, to be confronted with his accuser and any witnesses, "to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor," and to have an attorney defend him. The joint resolution re-added a Madison line requiring the jury to be composed of impartial jurors from the district in which the crime was supposedly committed.

7) People are entitled to a trial by jury in "suits at common law" in which "the value in controversy" exceeds 20 dollars. This was edited from the House's version, which blocked appealing to the Supreme Court in cases where the "value in controversy" was less than $1000.

8) People are protected against excessive fines and bail, and against cruel and unusual punishment. This line is taken straight from the 1689 English Bill of Rights, and was unchanged through the entire approval process.

9) Specifying certain rights in the Constitution does not deny the existence or importance of other individual rights. This was unchanged through the approval process.

10) Powers not delegated to the federal government go to the states. The Senate changed the end of the sentence to add "or to the people."

The ratification process ran from 1789 all the way to 1791. Of the fourteen states (Vermont was added in March 1791), eleven were needed for ratification. The above ten amendments were ratified by the eleventh state, Virginia, on December 15, 1791. Georgia supported the Constitution in its original form and found a bill of rights unnecessary, so did not ratify. The two chambers of the Massachusetts and Connecticut state legislatures ratified different sets of the amendments and were unable to reconcile the two, so they ended up ratifying none of them. The Congressional Apportionment Amendment was ratified by every state except Delaware, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, Georgia, and Connecticut. This put it at only nine states, not enough to be ratified. The amendment about Congressional salaries was ratified at the time by Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina, Delaware, Vermont, and Virginia, putting it at six states, also not enough to be ratified. In the 1990s, the proposal once again gained attention and enough states ratified it for it to be put into effect.

Interestingly, despite the strong feelings around the Bill of Rights, they were of little judicial significance for 150 years. Most 18th and 19th century federal court decisions were about the balance of power between the state and federal governments, and between the branches of the federal government. The Bill of Rights also only applied to the federal government until the ratification of the 14th Amendment in 1868. Nevertheless, today the Bill of Rights is regarded as a critical part of the Constitution as the protection of the people's civil liberties.


Title: Mary Wollstonecraft's <i>A Vindication of the Rights of Woman</i>
Description: 


Title: Samuel Jennings' <i>Liberty Displaying the Arts and Sciences</i>
Description: 


Title: US Post Office Department established
Description: 


Title: Legion of the United States established
Description: 


Title: Presidential Succession Act of 1792
Description: 


Title: Congress sells the Erie Triangle to Pennsylvania
Description: 


Title: Coinage Act of 1792
Description: 


Title: First presidential veto
Description: 


Title: "Mad" Anthony Wayne made Commanding General of the US Army
Description: 


Title: Apportionment Act of 1792
Description: 


Title: French Revolutionary Wars
Description: 


Title: First Militia Act of 1792
Description: 


Title: Second Miltia Act of 1792
Description: 


Title: George Vancouver explores and claims the Pacific Northwest for Great Britain
Description: 


Title: Kentucky becomes a state
Description: Kentucky (KY) joined the US as the 9th slave state and the 15th state overall.


Title: First Columbus Day celebrated
Description: 


Title: Construction of the US Executive Mansion begins
Description: 


Title: Election of 1792
Description: An election in which incumbent George Washington was re-elected. Similar to the previous one, Washington ran virtually unopposed, allowing him to take every state again. The race for vice president was more competitive, and was mainly between incumbent John Adams and NY Governor George Clinton, the former of whom won by 27 votes.

Main issues: none
Turnout: 6.3%
Significance: First election in which all of the 13 original colonies (as well as Kentucky and Vermont) cast votes
Lowest voter turnout

Electoral Votes
George Washington (I): 132
John Adams (F): 77
George Clinton (D-R): 50
Thomas Jefferson (D-R): 4
Aaron Burr (D-R): 1


Title: France executes King Louis XVI
Description: 


Title: Fugitive Slave Act of 1793
Description: 


Title: <i>Chisholm v. Georgia</i>
Description: A court case that brought about the passage of the 11th Amendment. Alexander Chisholm, a resident of South Carolina, sued the state of Georgia over payments made to the state during the War for Independence. Georgia refused to show, claiming that it could not be sued without its consent due to its position as a state. However, the Supreme Court ruled 3-1 that federal courts had the right to hear cases between citizens and states. However, Congress disliked the ruling and facilitated the passage of the 11th Amendment, which overturned the verdict. <i>Chisholm v. Georgia</i> is often considered the first landmark Supreme Court case.


Title: George Washington's second inauguration
Description: 


Title: Proclamation of Neutrality
Description: 


Title: Yellow fever outbreak in Philadelphia
Description: 


Title: Construction on the US Capitol begins
Description: 


Title: Construction on the Old East, the oldest state university building, begins
Description: 


Title: Flag Act of 1794
Description: 


Title: Senate holds its first public session
Description: 


Title: <b>Eli Whitney's cotton gin patented</b>
Description: Eli Whitney applied for a patent for his new invention, the cotton gin (engine). It was a device that rapidly separated seeds from the cotton plant. It was originally intended to reduce demand for slave labor, but instead caused it to skyrocket to unprecedented levels.


Title: Slave Trade Act of 1794
Description: 


Title: <b>Naval Act of 1794</b>
Description: A law passed under the Washington Administration that authorized the construction of six frigates that would become the start of the US Navy. The law was passed because of the harassment and attacks made by Barbary pirates on American merchant ships, and because the US had sold their last ship by 1785. The frigates were as follows:
1) USS United States (launched May 10, 1797)
2) USS Constellation (September 9, 1797)
3) USS Constitution (October 21, 1797)
4) USS Chesapeake (December 2, 1799)
5) USS Congress (August 15, 1799)
6) USS President (April 10, 1800)

The total cost for the project was almost $700,000.


Title: Neutrality Act of 1794
Description: 


Title: Battle of Fallen Timbers
Description: The last battle in the Northwest Indian War, fought between 3000 US troops led by Generals Anthony Wayne (commander of the Legion of the United States) and Charles Scott (Kentucky militia) and ~1200 Western Confederate warriors led by Chiefs Little Turtle (Miami) and Blue Jacket (Shawnee). The Confederates were also aided by a British company of Canadian militiamen led by Captain Alexander McKillop. Wayne and his men were able to drive the warriors back with a bayonet charge, forcing them towards the British Fort Miami. However, the British in the fort denied the Confederates assistance, unwilling to fight another war with the Americans. This refusal shook Confederate confidence in the ability to defend their homeland, as they had just lost the backing of a valuable and powerful ally. Wayne handily defeated the warriors and the British withdrew from the Northwest Territory. Realizing they had lost their only chance to win the war, the Confederacy sued for peace, agreeing to sign the Treaty of Greenville, which brought the Northwest Indian War to a close. However, Tecumseh, a Shawnee who fought in the battle, was upset at the humiliation his people suffered from the treaty, and in 20 years he rallied tribes to attack the US again.


Title: Jay's Treaty
Description: A treaty drafted in Great Britain to keep the US out of the Anglo-French War that was taking place at the time. It was signed on November 19, 1795 and ratified on June 24, 1795. The US agreed to pay off debts to the British, and that the British could remove French property from US ships. In return, Great Britain had to abandon their forts in the Northwest territory (which they ended up not doing). The pro-French Democratic-Republicans were enraged that Jay gave the British such a great deal. However, the pro-British Federalists loved it, because it improved relations with Great Britain. It helped keep the US out of a war that might have destroyed it.


Title: Eleventh Amendment
Description: The 11th amendment to the Constitution is ratified, which prevents states from being sued by citizens not residing within that state, as well as foreigners. The amendment was added in response to the ruling in <i>Chisholm v. Georgia</i>, in which the Supreme Court ruled the opposite. Congress pass the amendment in order to get around the decision.


Title: Treaty of Greenville
Description: A treaty between the US and the Native American tribes of the Northwest Territory that ended the Northwest Indian War. It was signed at Fort Greenville in modern-day Ohio and redefined what parts of the area each party controlled. Specifically, Native Americans were to relinquish all claims in Ohio except the northwest, demarcated by the Greenville Treaty Line, though they could still hunt in the ceded land. In return, the Native Americans would be paid every year in money and cloth, and were given $20,000 for accepting the treaty. The Northwestern tribes were left unhappy with the treaty, and tension grew between them and the US as white settlers continued to encroach on the territory allotted to the tribes by the treaty, which would culminate in another war in 1810.


Title: Pinckney's Treaty
Description: A treaty between the US and Spain establishing good relations between the two nations and the border of West Florida. Its northern border was originally set at the 31st Parallel in 1763, but was changed the next year to 32° 22′ to give the colony more land. However, the US claimed the new land allotted to West Florida had been theirs first. In 1784, Spain shut off trade between the US and Louisiana until the dispute was resolved. US delegate Thomas Pinckney and Spanish delegate met in Madrid and negotiated the treaty. Spain agreed to cede their claims to the extended border of West Florida, formally setting the colony's northern border to be at the 31st parallel north between the Chattahoochee River in the East and the Mississippi River in the West. It also established the western boundary of the United States at the Spanish colony of Louisiana. The US and Spain agreed not to incite Native American attacks on each other and instead protect each other's ships and establish good trade relations. It was ratified by the US on March 7, 1796, and by Spain on April 25, 1796.


Title: Senate rejects John Rutledge's appointment as Chief Justice
Description: 


Title: First American Party System
Description: The First American Party System consisted of the Federalist Party (founded by Alexander Hamilton, supported by John Jay, John Adams, and John Marshall) and the Democratic-Republican Party (founded by Thomas Jefferson, supported by James Madison). The Federalist opposition was formally the Republican Party but was called Democratic-Republicans by the Federalists to compare them with France's radical democracy. They remained as the dominant powers in US politics until 1815, when the Federalists disbanded.

Federalist Party
-1 president
-rule by the elites
-anti-expansion of suffrage
-powerful central government
-loose constructionist interpretation of the Constitution
-government should foster business
-protective tariffs
-pro-British
-believed the national debt to be a blessing
-expanding bureaucracy
-powerful central bank
-restrictions on free speech/press
-supporters were mainly along the coast and in New England
-strong navy

(Jeffersonian) Democratic-Republican Party
-2 presidents
-rule by the "informed masses"
-pro-expansion of suffrage
-strong state governments
-strict constructionist interpretation of the Constitution
-favored agriculture
-no favors for manufacturers
-pro-French
-believed the national debt to be a curse
-reduction of federal officeholders
-encouraged state banks
-relatively free speech/press
-supporters were mainly in the South
-small navy


Title: First ever elephant in the US arrives from India
Description: 


Title: Tennessee becomes a state
Description: Tennessee (TN) joined the US as the 10th slave state and the 16th state overall.


Title: US takes possession of Detroit
Description: 


Title: <b>Washington's Farewell Address</b>
Description: An address marking the resignation of Washington from the presidential office. In it, he warned of the creation of political factions, fearing it would tear the nation apart. This part of his advice would soon go ignored and instead the First American Party System was created. He also warned against interference in European affairs, something his successors followed more closely for several decades, with the US adopting an isolationist policy.

Full Text
https://bit.ly/1dLozEs


Title: Election of 1796
Description: An election in which Federalist John Adams beat Democratic-Republican Thomas Jefferson and became the 2nd president. This was the first contested election, as incumbent George Washington had decided not to run for a third term. It was the first true test to see if the republican voting system worked, as well as the first in which political parties played a major role. Federalists supported Vice President John Adams, while Democratic-Republicans rallied around former Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson. The campaign was filled with bitter insults and accusations. Federalists accused the Republicans of supporting the French government, which was executing large numbers of people unjustifiably. Republicans linked Adams to the policies of Alexander Hamilton, another Federalist known for his pro-British sentiments and support for a powerful federal government. They also connected Adams to John Jay, another Federalist responsible for signing Jan eponymous treaty, which Republicans were upset was too good a deal with the British. Adams ran with former South Carolina Governor Thomas Pinckney as his running mate, while Jefferson picked New York Senator Aaron Burr. Adams was elected president, netting 71 electoral votes, one more than the 70 required to win. However, some delegates who voted for Adams cast their second vote for candidates besides Pinckney, resulting in Jefferson coming in second place and winning the vice presidency.

Main issues: Whiskey Rebellion, Jay's Treaty
Turnout: 20.1% (record)
Significance: First contested election
Only election in which the president and vice president were from opposing parties

Electoral Votes
John Adams (F): 71
Thomas Jefferson	 (D-R): 68
Thomas Pinckney (F): 59
Aaron Burr (D-R): 30
Samuel Adams (D-R): 15
Oliver Ellsworth (F): 11
George Clinton (D-R): 7
John Jay (F): 5
James Iredell	(F): 3
George Washington (I): 2
John Henry (F): 2
Samuel Johnston (D): 2
Charles Cotesworth Pinckney (D): 1


Title: Treaty of Tripoli
Description: 


Title: Adams Administration
Description: President: John Adams
Number: 2
Party: Federalist
Home State: Massachusetts
Vice President: Thomas Jefferson (D-R)

Previous Occupations:
MA Congressional delegate (1774-1778)
US Minister to the Netherlands (1782-1788)
US Minister to the UK (1785-1788)
US Vice President (1789-1797)

Congress Majority Parties (Senate / House)
5th Congress: Federalist / Federalist
6th Congress: Federalist / Federalist

Chief Justice: Oliver Ellsworth (1797 - 1800)
John Marshall (1801)

Notable Qualities:
Only Federalist president
First president with an official party affiliation
First president to not be re-elected
First president not to have owned slaves


Title: Inauguration of John Adams
Description: 


Title: XYZ Affair
Description: A diplomatic crisis between the US and France. American diplomats were sent to France to negotiate issues that would prevent war from breaking out. They were approached by French officials that demanded bribes in order for the negotiations to begin. Though this was not uncommon at the time, the Americans were offended and refused to negotiate. These hostilities helped start the Quasi-War.


Title: William Blount impeached and expelled from the Senate
Description: 


Title: Charles Brockden Brown's <i>Wieland</i>
Description: 


Title: <i>Hollingsworth v. Virginia</i>
Description: Hollingsworth v. Virginia was a Supreme Court case in which it was ruled that the president has no formal role in the constitutional amendment process. Levi Hollingsworth, a Pennsylvania merchant, was suing the State of Virginia over some land claims. The Supreme Court in 1793 had ruled in Chisholm v. Georgia that citizens of one state could sue the government of another state. In 1798, the 11th Amendment was ratified, declaring that citizens of one state could not sue another state. Hollingsworth argued that the amendment was illegitimate, as it had not been presented to the president for approval.

In a unanimous decision, the Court ruled against Hollingsworth. The president had no official involvement with the amendment process. A constitutional amendment is not the same things as legislation, so it follows different rules. The process is laid out in Article V of the Constitution, and nowhere in that is the president mentioned. Also, none of the Bill of Rights amendments had been presented to the president, and those were all valid. If the president wished, he could sign the amendment to show his support for it, but that signature has no real effect on the amendment's validity.


Title: Mississippi Territory organized
Description: 


Title: <b>Alien and Sedition Acts</b>
Description: The Alien and Sedition Acts were a series of laws passed under the Adams Administration that were ostensibly to protect national security during the Quasi-War. They consisted of the following:

1) Naturalization Act (passed June 18): Extended the period of time foreigners had to be present in the US to gain citizenship to 14 years, up from the five years set in 1795. It had no expiration date, but was repealed in 1802 by a Republican Congress and administration. It was controversial even among the Federalist Party, as it would discourage immigration.
2) Alien Friends Act (July 8): Allowed the president to deport or imprison foreigners that were considered "dangerous." No one was ever charged under this act, but some immigrants did flee the country out of fear. It was set to expire in 1800, two years after it was passed, and was not renewed or repealed prematurely.
3) Alien Enemies Act (July 8): Allowed the president to deport or imprison any male citizen of a hostile nation above the age of 14 during wartime. It has no expiration date, and is the only law of the four to remain today. It was used during the War of 1812, and both World Wars.
4) Sedition Act (July 14): Banned "false, scandalous and malicious writing" against the federal government, Congress, or the president. Those convicted faced up to two years in prison and $2000 in fines (about $48,000 in 2022). It was set to expire in 1799, one year after it was passed, which it did without being renewed or repealed prematurely. Unlike the Alien Friends Act, people were prosecuted under the Sedition Act, though only 26 people were arrested under it, and not all were convicted. Vermont Congressman Matthew Lyon was the first to be tried. He had described the administration as one of "ridiculous pomp, foolish adulation, and selfish avarice," and was sentenced to a $1000 fine and four months in jail. James Callender, a political journalist infamous for his vicious language and affinity for uncovering scandals, was sentenced to a $200 fine and nine months in jail for calling Adams a "repulsive pedant, a gross hypocrite and an unprincipled oppressor." Benjamin Franklin Bache, editor of the Philadelphia Aurora newspaper, was arrested for calling Adams "blind, bald, crippled, [and] toothless," comments Adams was particularly sensitive to. He died before receiving a sentence. The harshest sentence was handed down to David Brown, a Revolutionary War veteran from Massachusetts who erected a liberty pole reading, "No Stamp Act, No Sedition Act, No Alien Bills, No Land Tax, downfall to the Tyrants of America; peace and retirement to the President; Long Live the Vice President." He was given a $480 fine and 18 months in prison.

The Adams Administration claimed that the laws were a matter of national security. The country was entering the Quasi-War with France, and they needed to protect themselves from foreign agents sowing discord in an attempt to weaken the war effort or perhaps destabilize the country. To that end, the Alien Acts were particularly targeted towards French immigrants. As a wartime measure, the administration said, the most inflammatory acts would only last a year or two, and be renewed if the situation with France or another country came up again. The critics disagreed, and they were numerous. They claimed the Alien Acts were passed to suppress Adams' political opponents. Immigrants typically became Republicans, so if it was more difficult for them to become a citizen or stay in the country, it would be more difficult for them to vote against Adams. The Sedition Act was even more scandalous. The critics saw it as politically motivated and a blatant violation of the First Amendment's protection of the freedom of speech and of the press. Noticeably, the text of the law does not mention criticism of the vice president. Adams' vice president was Thomas Jefferson, who opposed the Federalists. Therefore, opposition of the Federalist president and Federalist-controlled Congress was banned, but the Republican vice president was fair game. This further convinced critics that the law was political. Indeed, the Sedition Act was mostly used to imprison the Democratic-Republicans that criticized Adams. Thomas Jefferson and James Madison authored the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions in protest, powerful and popular essays that claimed that the laws violated the people's liberties. Though the laws were used sparingly, they proved to be tremendously unpopular. The Federalist Party, already seen as elitist and perhaps even tyrannical, saw its popularity plummet. The coming 1800 election would be a Republican sweep, and the Federalists would never again hold the presidency or a majority in either house of Congress. Lyon was even re-elected to Congress while in jail, the only person to do so. The acts continued to be condemned decades later. In 1840, after pushing from Lyon's descendants, Congress refunded the funds charged to Lyon under the Sedition Act. The Supreme Court did not overturn these acts, as it would not establish its power of judicial review until 1803. But later writings by the Supreme Court have suggested that at least the Sedition Act was unconstitutional. The acts show how in early America, how free speech should be was still a matter of debate.


Title: Quasi-War
Description: An undeclared war fought almost entirely at sea between the US and France, Caused because the US refused to pay debts to France for assisting in the Revolution, claiming it was owed to a previous regime. France was also upset about Jay's Treaty, claiming that they would rather help an old enemy than an old ally. A two year series of naval skirmishes ensued. Adams, desperate for the conflict not to escalate, rejects his party's anti-French ideals and opened negotiations with the European nation. Crying treason, many Federalists withdrew support for Adams, contributing to his loss at re-election.

On July 9, 1798, Congress passed the Commerce Protection Act, authorizing the president to use military force during the Quasi-War to protect American commerce.

Casualties:
514 Americans
Unknown French


Title: US Marine Corps established
Description: 


Title: Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions
Description: 


Title: New York gradually abolishes slavery
Description: Sometime in early 1799, New York passed a law that facilitated the gradual abolition of slavery. It declared that children of slaves born after July 4, 1799 would be not be born a slave. Instead, they would be an indentured servant until the age of 28 for males and 25 for females. Slaves born before that date were reclassified as indentured servants and so could not be sold. No living slaves were freed. However, the last slaves in New York were not free until 1827. New York became the 7th free state, making 9 slave states.


Title: Logan Act
Description: 


Title: George Washington dies
Description: George Washington dies on December 14, 1799. His will frees the 124 slaves that he owns outright upon the death of his wife, Martha. They are freed by Martha in 1801, about 18 months before her death. Richard Allen, a black minister, calls on the nation's white leaders to follow Washington's lead.


Title: Johnny Appleseed begins handing out seeds
Description: 


Title: Report of 1800
Description: 


Title: Library of Congress established
Description: 


Title: Indiana Territory organized
Description: 


Title: Census of 1800
Description: National population
5.3 million total
894,000 slaves

State populations
1) Virginia 880,000
2) Pennsylvania 603,000
3) New York 586,000
4) Massachusetts 575,000 (152,000 of which were in modern-day Maine)
5) North Carolina 478,000
6) Maryland 349,000
7) South Carolina 346,000
8) Connecticut 251,000
9) Kentucky 221,000
10) New Jersey 211,000
11) New Hampshire 184,000
12) Georgia 163,000
13) Vermont 154,000
14) Tennessee 106,000
15) Rhode Island 69,000
16) Delaware 64,000

Slave populations
1) Virginia 347,000
2) South Carolina 146,000
3) North Carolina 133,000
4) Maryland 103,000
5) Georgia 60,000
6) Kentucky 40,000
7) New York 20,000
8) Tennessee 14,000
9) New Jersey 12,000
10) Delaware 6000
11) Pennsylvania 1200
12) Connecticut 950
13) Rhode Island 380
14) New Hampshire 8
15) Massachusetts 0
15) Vermont 0

City populations
1) New York City 61,000
2) Philadelphia 41,000
3) Baltimore 27,000
4) Boston 25,000
5) Charleston 19,000


Title: Gabriel's Rebellion
Description: A failed slave revolt organized by Gabriel. He intended to March into Richmond, VA, but had to cancel because of rain. He was betrayed by a couple slaves and was later hanged.


Title: Election of 1800
Description: In this election, Democratic-Republican Thomas Jefferson beat incumbent Federalist John Adams and became the 3rd president. The campaign was fraught with more insults and accusations. The Federalists warned that the Democratic-Republicans would ruin the country with their radical and pro-French policies. The Republicans countered by bringing up the Alien and Sedition Acts, claiming that Adams was unconstitutionally suppressing the freedom of the press, as well as claiming the Federalists supported the despotic British who the country had just fought a devastating war with.

Alexander Hamilton, head of the Federalist Party, had originally had hopes of influence in the Adams Administration. However, after the Election of 1796 he found that Adams was more independent than he would have liked. To make sure he still had influence in the government, Hamilton put his support behind the more partisan Charles C. Pinckney, who became Adams' running mate. Hamilton's plan backfired when Republican press got hold of a letter he wrote criticizing Adams, which exposed the divisions among the Federalists, losing support for Hamilton, Adams, and the party. Jefferson, meanwhile, chose to run with Aaron Burr again. When the votes were cast, Jefferson and Burr took the lead, but there was a problem. Each electoral delegate was allotted two votes, which were meant to be used for a presidential candidate and his respective running mate, but in reality either could be used for anyone. One delegate was supposed to throw away one of his votes which would ensure that the presidential candidate always got at least one more vote than his running mate. For example, one Federalist delegate voted for Adams, but cast his second vote for John Jay, a Federalist who was not even running. This ensured that Pinckney got at least one vote less than Adams. However, the designated delegate for the Democratic-Republicans did not do so for an unknown reason, creating a tie between Jefferson and Burr. In these circumstances, it was up to the Federalist-controlled House of Representatives to break the tie, with each state being allowed to cast one vote. All seven Republican-controlled delegations voted for Jefferson, in addition to the Federalist-controlled Georgian delegation. Six Federalist-controlled delegations voted for Burr, and Vermont and Maryland were unable to come to a consensus, forcing them to cast a blank ballot. This left Jefferson with eight states to Burr's six, but neither had the nine necessary for a majority. The ballots were cast 34 more times, each resulting in the same number of states for each candidate. Finally, Hamilton intervened. He despised Jefferson's viewpoints, but saw him as the lesser of two evils. In the 36th ballot, he instructed his Federalist allies in the Maryland and Vermont delegations not to vote, giving the vote in both states to Jefferson, netting him the presidency.

The election was viewed as a constitutional crisis. The country decided that an incident like that ought not to happen again, and so worked to pass the 12th Amendment, which resolved the issue by requiring the two votes of each delegate to be for a presidential and vice presidential candidate, respectively. This would eliminate the "throwing away votes" pseudo-rule implemented before.

When Adams' term expired, he peacefully stepped down and allowed the opposition party to take power. This was an important step for the fledgling republic, whose integrity is tested most when the party in power is voted out. Adams stepped down instead of remaining in office and mobilizing the military to take out the opposition leaders. The election results established a precedent for the party in power peacefully giving up when they are not re-elected.

Main issues: Alien and Sedition Acts, XYZ Affair
Turnout: 32.3% (record)
Significance: Brought about the passage of the 12th Amendment
Peaceful transition of power to the opposition party
Only election in which the incumbent vice president ran against the incumbent president

Electoral Votes:
Thomas Jefferson (D-R): 73
Aaron Burr (D-R): 73
John Adams (F): 65
Charles C. Pinckney (F): 64
John Jay (F): 1


Title: Congress convenes for the first time in Washington, DC
Description: 


Title: <b>John Marshall becomes Chief Justice</b>
Description: John Marshall was the fourth Chief Justice of the United States. He was a Federalist, both as it pertained to ratifying the Constitution and to the later Federalist Party. He was part of the Virginia Convention that voted to ratify the Constitution. As such, he believed in a strong federal government. He was asked twice by President Washington to serve as Attorney General, but he declined both times, saying he wanted to continue his own legal career. He became a congressman in 1799, and was confirmed as secretary of state in 1800. Later that year, Chief Justice Oliver Ellsworth retired in poor health, just a few months before Thomas Jefferson and a Republican Congress were set to take over. After being turned down by former Chief Justice John Jay, Adams nominated Marshall. The Senate was reluctant to confirm him, thinking him unqualified. In any case, Marshall would become the longest-serving chief justice and the fourth-longest serving Supreme Court justice, and would be involved in many high-profile decisions. These include:

Marbury v. Madison (1803): the Supreme Court establishes its power of judicial review over federal law.
Fletcher v. Peck (1810): the Supreme Court establishes its power of judicial review over state law.
McCulloch v. Maryland (1819): follows a loose interpretation of the Elastic Clause.
Dartmouth College v. Woodward (1819): Contract Clause protects corporations from having their contracts interfered with by state governments.
Gibbons v. Ogden (1824): Commerce Clause covers the power to regulate navigation.
Worcester v. Virginia (1832): states cannot make deals with Indian tribes.
Barron v. Baltimore (1833): the Bill of Rights do not apply to state laws.


Title: Jefferson Administration
Description: President: Thomas Jefferson
Number: 3
Party: Democratic-Republican
Home State: Virginia
Vice President: Aaron Burr (1801 - 04)
George Clinton (1804-09)
Secretary of State: James Madison

Previous Occupations:
VA Congressional delegate (1775-76, 1783-84)
VA Governor (1779-81)
Minister to France (1785-89)
Secretary of State (1790-93)
Vice President (1797-1801)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
7th Congress: Democratic-Republican / Democratic-Republican
8th Congress: Democratic-Republican / Democratic-Republican
9th Congress: Democratic-Republican / Democratic-Republican
10th Congress: Democratic-Republican / Democratic-Republican

Chief Justice: John Marshall

Notable Qualities:
First Democratic-Republican president
First president to have beaten an incumbent
Only incumbent vice president to have run against the incumbent president and won


Title: Thomas Jefferson's first inauguration
Description: After a bitter election, Thomas Jefferson was declared the victor and the 3rd president over incumbent John Adams. As such, Jefferson emphasized union in his inaugural address. He said that "every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle.. We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists." Partisan newspapers were quick to throw mud at their opponents. Jefferson wanted to remind the country that, for all their differences, they shared the fundamental principles that made up America. Adams, upset at his loss, refused to attend the inauguration, a first for the fledgling nation. However, Adams did not insist the election was fraudulent, or blockade himself in the White House, or order Jefferson arrested. Despite his hard feelings, Adams gave up his power to his rival. One of the hardest tests for new republics is whether power can be peacefully transitioned to the rival party, and the US passed.


Title: West Point established
Description: 


Title: First Barbary War
Description: The Barbary States of Tripoli, Algiers, and Tunis in North Africa frequently engaged in pirate raids of ships that sailed into their waters. They kidnapped the sailors and enslaved them if a ransom was not paid for their return. When American sailors were kidnapped, the US refused to pay and Tripoli declared war. This was the first US war that took place on foreign soil. In 1805, US troops captured the Tripolitan city of Derna, marking the first time the US flag was raised in a foreign city in a military victory.

Casualties: 
74 Americans
~800 Tripolitans


Title: Second Great Awakening
Description: A second religious revival, featuring evangelicals like Charles Finney. It inspired many social movements, like temperance, abolition, feminism, Mormonism, utopianism, and the construction of insane asylums, orphanages, prisons, and public schools.


Title: <i>New York Post</i> begins publishing
Description: 


Title: <b><i>Marbury v. Madison</i></b>
Description: In the 1800 election, President John Adams lost to Thomas Jefferson, and Congress was set to become controlled by Republicans. Angered at his defeat, Adams wanted to get back at Jefferson by nominating as many federal judges as he could to deny Jefferson the opportunity to do so himself. On March 2, 1801, two days before his term expired, he nominated almost 60 judges and sent them to the lame-duck Federalist-controlled Senate to be confirmed. The Senate confirmed the judges en masse the next day, and had Secretary of State John Marshall (soon to become chief justice) deliver the commissions to the new judges. Republicans criticized the move, calling them "midnight judges," as they were supposedly appointed and confirmed the midnight before the old administration left. Marshall had his brother, James, rush around the country to deliver the commissions, but was unable to get all of them done before Jefferson's inauguration on March 4. Once Jefferson was sworn in, Marshall ceased to be secretary of state, so he was not allowed to deliver the commissions anymore. Jefferson immediately had his secretary of state, James Madison, refuse to deliver the remaining commissions. William Marbury, one of the judges who had not received his commission, sued Madison in the Supreme Court. Marbury argued that he was entitled to his commission, as he had been appointed and confirmed as normal. Madison argued that if the commission was not delivered, it was void.

On February 24, 1803, the Court made its decision. The Court was headed by John Marshall, an Adams appointee and his former secretary of state. The majority opinion, written by Marshall, ruled that Marbury was entitled to his commission, and Madison's withholding of it was illegal. It then ruled that "the very essence of civil liberty certainly consists in the right of every individual to claim the protection of the laws whenever he receives an injury." In other words, Marbury was entitled to legal recourse for his injury, a principle well established in English common law. Specifically, a writ of mandamus, a court order commanding a government official to carry out their legal duties, would have to be issued. The Judiciary Act of 1789 gave the Supreme Court original jurisdiction over cases involving writs of mandamus. 

However, that contradicted Article III of the Constitution, which read that aside from certain cases, none of which were relevant to the situation, "the supreme Court shall have appellate Jurisdiction, both as to Law and Fact, with such Exceptions, and under such Regulations as the Congress shall make." Therefore, Congress expanding the Court's power to original jurisdiction over other cases contradicted the Constitution. Marshall held that the Constitution is the supreme law of the land, so if a law violates the Constitution, that law is to be considered invalid. Marshall pointed out that the Constitution limits Congress's powers, so any law exceeding those powers is illegitimate. Most famously, he wrote that "it is emphatically the province and duty of the Judicial Department to say what the law is." This principle is called judicial review, the power of the courts to "strike down" a law if it contradicts the Constitution. This power is not explicitly given to the courts in the Constitution, but it was a well-established principle, both in England and the colonies. Marshall insisted it was necessary; after all, if no law could be struck down, then Congress could pass any law it wanted, and the Constitution's limits on power would be meaningless.

This was the first court case involving the question of judicial review. Marshall had been hoping for an opportunity to bring it up, and he saw it in this case. In a sense, the Supreme Court both expanded and limited its powers. It established its ability to exercise judicial review, but also removed the expanded power the Judiciary Act gave it, as well as the potential future expansions of power Congress could give it. Jefferson, a strict constructionist, objected that the Court was interpreting a power not explicitly given to it, but he came to accept it, recognizing its necessity and inevitability.

Marbury v. Madison is often seen as one of the most important decisions in the history of the Supreme Court, if not the most important. Many of the future landmark decisions involved striking down a law for being uncostitutional, which could not have happened if judicial review had not been established in this case. However, the Supreme Court rarely exercised this power early in its history. It would not be until the 1857 Dred Scott Decision that judicial review over federal law would come up again.


Title: Ohio becomes a state
Description: Ohio (OH) joins the US as the 8th free state and the 17th state overall.


Title: Igbo Landing mass suicide
Description: 


Title: Napoleonic Wars with the UK
Description: 


Title: <b>Louisiana Purchase</b>
Description: In the late 17th century, France claimed the Territory of Louisiana as part of its colonial efforts. It spanned the western part of the Mississippi River drainage basin, a massive territory, though no one at the time knew exactly how large it was. France established the towns of St. Louis and New Orleans along the Mississippi River, but outside of those the territory reMained sparsely populated by Europeans. France lost Louisiana to Spain at the end of the Seven Years' War in 1763. In 1800, France, now under Napoleon, wanted to restore its colonial empire. Napoleon had Spain transfer control of Louisiana back to France.

However, by 1803 Louisiana had become a liability. France's most lucrative colony was Saint-Domingue, used for growing sugar. In 1791, the slaves revolted and pushed the French out of the island. Napoleon had hoped to reconquer the island, but by 1803 the effort was going nowhere, and he called it off. Saint-Domingue grew so much sugar that there was not enough land to grow food to feed the colonists or slaves. Louisiana's main purpose was to grow that food and ship it to Saint-Domingue. However, now that Saint-Domingue was lost to France, Louisiana was no longer necessary. It was also underpopulated, which left it vulnerable to a British or American invasion. Napoleon also needed money to fund his upcoming war against the UK.

The US had had its eyes on New Orleans since the end of the Revolutionary War in 1783. In 1795, they signed a treaty with Spain, granting them access to trade through New Orleans and navigation along the entire Mississippi River. New Orleans had become important to American commerce in the west. But more than that, New Orleans and the rest of Louisiana represented a threat to American national security. If relations with France soured, they could launch an invasion right on America's doorstep. If France committed to populating the region, such a large area, especially with the mouth of the Mississippi River, could grow to be a serious commercial rival. Those fears increased in 1801, when Napoleon sent a garrison to New Orleans. At this point, the US was still a weak country, easily attacked by the UK or France. The two old rivals were about to go to war, and Americans were divided on who to support, or whether to stay out entirely, if they could. In late 1801 President Jefferson sent US Minister to France Robert Livingston to negotiate purchasing New Orleans for up to $10 million. If the deal fell through, they were prepared to approach the UK for an alliance.

Negotiations apparently stalled for two years. In 1803, Jefferson sent Livingston reinforcements. French noble Pierre Samuel du Pont, both a friend of Jefferson's and connected to French politicians, as well as James Monroe, one of Jefferson's allies and a former minister to France, joined Livingston. On April 23, French Treasury Minister François Barbé-Marbois shocked the US delegates by offering the entirety of Louisiana for just $15 million. This turned out to be less than three cents per acre. Again, no one knew exactly how big Louisiana was at the time (it was 530 million acres, or 828,000 square miles), but the Americans knew they had been offered the bargain of the century. Today, the deal would be about $342 milion, or about 65 cents an acre. Livingston had not actually been authorized to pay that much, but he accepted the deal anyway, confident that the US would be supportive and fearing that France could withdraw its offer at any time. On April 30, Livingston, Monroe, and Barbé-Marbois signed the Louisiana Purchase. After the deal, Livingston said, "We have lived long, but this is the noblest work of our whole lives... From this day the United States take their place among the powers of the first rank." The US had nearly doubled its land, at least as far as it and the Europeans were concerned.

Once a treaty had been signed, it had to be ratified by the Senate to become legitimate. Tthe purchase was officially announced on July 4, and had to be ratified by October. Jefferson was immensely pleased with the deal, but feared it was unconstitutional. He was a strict constructionist, and the Constitution did not explicitly allow the federal government to buy land from foreign nations. 

Both Republicans and Federalists were concerned as well. They feared both the purchase's constitutionality and the effect it would have on the balance of power and the economy. The eastern states, which founded the country and made up the vast majority of states and people, didn't want their influence diminished by even more new western states. Some thought that the new land would be turned into many new slave states, which would divide the country between North and South. Federalists thought that the new states would be Republican, which would diminish their own power even more.  New England ports would have to compete with New Orleans to sell western-grown crops at. Speculators in the North would have to compete with those in the new territory. Republican Majority Leader John Randolph of the House of Representatives motioned to reject the purchase, but it failed by two votes. Senator Timothy Pickering and other Northern Federalists even floated the idea of the North breaking off from the country and forming a confederacy, but the idea didn't get far.

There was also the matter of the territory's residents. Its non-Indian population was about 60,000, around half of which were slaves, and the rest a mix of Europeans. France, not wanting to relegate its former subjects to second-class citizenry, required the US give all of Louisiana's inhabitants full citizenship as part of the purchase. Some Americans were concerned that these foreigners would not understand or support democracy or other American ideals. Louisiana's citizens themselves were not consulted, though they were generally unhappy with the transfer. Americans were more likely to settle in large numbers than the Spanish and French had. They were afraid the Americans would sour relations with the Indians, who would take it out on them. Nevertheless, their opinions were ignored and the debate continued.

Public reactions to the purchase were mostly positive. One newspaper wrote, "we are to give money, of which we have too little, for land, of which we already have too much." However, most were enthusiastic when they realized they could have more land all to themselves (which was especially important when property ownership was a requirement for suffrage). 

Despite his constitutional misgivings, Jefferson thought that the purchase was the right thing for the country. Gaining Louisiana would protect American safety and promote commerce. More than that, Jefferson dreamed of an "empire of liberty." In his vision, the life of freedom was that of a yeoman farmer working his own land and not having to answer to a master. With so much empty land (not counting Indians), every American family could have its own farm. Unfortunately for Jefferson's vision, the Louisiana Purchase would end up providing more territory for slavery to expand into, ruining his "empire of liberty." Jefferson suggested a constitutional amendment to allow the purchase, but his cabinet assured him it was unnecessary. Secretary of State James Madison, who also authored much of the Constitution, said it was constitutional any way you look at it. Treasury Secretary Albert Gallatin noted that the president was explicitly granted the power to negotiate treaties, of which land exchanges were a common part. Jefferson, now comforted, enthusiastically supported the purchase. As for Congress, despite the many misgivings listed above, it was ratified easily.

The US did not actually have the money to pay for the land. They made a down payment of $3 million in gold and bonds  They funded the rest by borrowing money from British bankers. Because France used that money to fund its war against the UK, in a sense the British funded their own enemy. Nevertheless, the British government allowed the deal to go through because they preferred the neutral Americans to control Louisiana over the French.

Louisiana was formally transferred on December 20 in New Orleans. The Louisiana area was initially organized under a government similar to the one already in place from the French and Spanish. On October 1, 1804, the area was organized into the Territory of Orleans in the south, and the District of Louisiana (later the Territory of Louisiana) for the rest of the area.

As mentioned, Louisiana's borders were not well-defined. None of the treaties transferring it had specified the area. The US claimed it was meant to span the western part of the Mississippi River drainage basin, but that was not easy to measure without having explored the area. Spain, whose New Spain colony bordered Louisiana, claimed it was just the western bank of the Mississippi, including St. Louis and New Orleans. Louisiana also bordered British Canada, whose western portions were also poorly defined. These border disputes were resolved in 1819 and 1818, respectively.

The Louisiana Purchase gave the US claim to the land, but settling and controlling that land was a different story. It needed to be explored so that the country knew what it was working with. Jefferson sent three expeditions out: one to the Red River basin in 1806, one to the ArKansas River in 1806, and, most famously, one along the Missouri River in 1804, headed by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark. Also in the way of settlement were the various Indian tribes that lived all over the area. None of them respected outsiders' claims to the land, whether it be from France, Spain, or America. As far as they were concerned, their people had been living there for as long as anyone could remember, and no redrawing lines on a map was going to change that. The area would see decades of unrespected treaties, courts forcing Indians out of their lands, and warfare.


Title: James Callender dies
Description: 


Title: Haiti wins independence
Description: 


Title: New Jersey abolishes slavery
Description: New Jersey passed the 1804 Act of Gradual Abolition, which does exactly as it says. However, there reMained a few (16) slaves in New Jersey all the way up to 1865, when the practice was abolished altogether. New Jersey became the 9th free state, making 8 slave states.


Title: Judge John Pickering removed from office
Description: John Pickering was a federal district judge, appointed by President Washington on February 10, 1795, and confirmed by the Senate the next day. On February 3, 1803, President Jefferson requested the House of Representatives to impeach Pickering, citing bad behavior. He came to court drunk, made clearly rulings that were clearly inconsistent with the law, and was generally mentally incompetent. On March 2, the House charged Pickering with intoxication and unlawful rulings. The charge was not without its detractors. Some Federalists thought that Jefferson and the House were violating the Constitution, as PIckering had not committed the "high crimes or misdemeanors" required for impeachment. The law does, though, provide for removal of judges for "bad behavior." The Senate continued with Pickering's trial on January 4, 1804, though Pickering himself was not present. He was convicted 19-7 on all charges on March 12 and was removed from office. He was the first person to be impeached and removed.


Title: Spanish colony of Alta California created
Description: 


Title: Lewis and Clark Expedition
Description: Officially known as the Corps of Discovery Expedition, it was an exploration of the newly purchased Louisiana Territory organized by President Jefferson. The Corps of Discovery was a group of soldiers headed by Captain Meriwether Lewis and Second Lieutenant William Clark. They were tasked with exploring the new territory, establishing an American presence there, and finding a practical route to the Pacific Ocean as their primary goals. The Corps also took notes of the area's geography, flora, and fauna, and established relations with local Native American tribes. They started in Pittsburgh, PA on May 14, 1804, and traveled across the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers until they arrived at the Missouri River, which would take them through the territory. In November, they met Sacagawea, a Shoshone woman who acted as their interpreter with other Native Americans. The group established Fort Mandan in present-day North Dakota in December 1805, and reached the Pacific Ocean on November 20, 1805. They camped there for the winter and returned to St. Louis in modern-day Missouri to report their findings. Overall, they charted 140 maps, established relations with 70 tribes, and discovered over 200 new species of plants and animals.


Title: Twelfth Amendment
Description: The 12th amendment to the Constitution is ratified, which changed the electoral college to avoid deadlocks. Under the old rules, electoral delegates received two votes, which they were meant to use to cast for a candidate and their running mate. One of the delegates was supposed to throw away one of their votes to ensure that the vice presidential candidate received one less vote, making them vice president as intended. However, in the 1800 election, the intended delegate did not comply, meaning that an equal number of votes had been cast for Thomas Jefferson and his running mate Aaron Burr. The 12th Amendment fixed this by assigning each delegate two votes, with one that has to be cast for a presidential candidate and the other for a vice presidential candidate. Whoever receives a majority of the presidential electoral vote becomes president, and whoever receives the majority of the vice presidential vote becomes vice president.

If no presidential candidate receives a majority, the victor is determined by the House of Representatives, who May only select between the top three candidates. However, instead of each representative voting individually, each state only gets one elector, in a manner similar to that of the Senate. This is to prevent candidates from populous states from having an unfair advantage, as electors tend to favor a candidate from their home state. If the House cannot come to a decision by March 4 of the year after the election, the newly elected vice president will act as president in the meantime. Similarly, if no vice presidential candidate wins a majority, the Senate will choose the victor between the top two candidates.

Additionally, the amendment prevents anyone who could not constitutionally become president from becoming vice president. Finally, electors cannot cast their vote for two people of the same state, to prevent them from favoritism.


Title: Burr-Hamilton Duel
Description: A duel in which Vice President Aaron Burr shot and killed former Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton.

Former Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton and Vice President Aaron Burr, were never on the best terms. Their relationship turned especially sour when Hamilton cast his support for Thomas Jefferson instead of Burr for president in the 1800 election. Hamilton viewed Jefferson as the lesser of two evils, and called Burr a "mischievous enemy." His support was the deciding factor in Jefferson's win, with Burr only scoring vice president. Hamilton struck Burr down again in 1804, where he greatly assisted Morgan Lewis in winning the election as Governor of New York, a position for which Burr was also running.

Their hostilities culminated with a letter published by Charles D. Cooper of the Albany Press showing Hamilton's hostilities toward Burr. The vice president demanded an apology from Hamilton and challenged him to a duel when he received none. Both participants, placing their honor in high regard, would not back down. It was confirmed that both Hamilton and Burr fired, with the former missing (allegedly on purpose) and the latter hitting. The shot mortally wounded Hamilton, who died the next day.

The duel heavily damaged Burr's political career. He did not run with Jefferson in the 1804 election, instead being replaced by George Clinton. He was charged with murder, as the practice of dueling was in the process of being outlawed in the North, but he was never brought to court. He fled to South Carolina but soon returned to the capital to continue to serve as vice president for the remainder of his term.

Alexander Hamiltonwas one of America's most celebrated Founding Fathers. Uniquely, he was not born in one of the thirteen colonies that formed the US, but in an island in the West Indies. He moved to New York as a teenager, then fought in the Revolutionary War when it broke out. He was promoted to lieutenant colonel as one of General Washington's aides. He fought at the Battle of Yorktown, the last major battle of the Revolutionary War.

But Hamilton is most famous for his accomplishments in economics and politics. In the two years he served in the Congress of the Confederation, Hamilton felt the impotence of the federal government firsthand. Always a strong proponent of a strong national government, he was one of the loudest voices calling for a constitutional convention to create a new, stronger government. He was sent as one of New York's three delegates to the convention in Philadelphia, and was the only one of the three to stay more than a few weeks. At the convention, he proposed a radical and out-of-touch frame of government that would have eliminated state sovereignty and made the president serve for life. This suggestion would cause his opponents to call him a monarchist for the rest of his life. Like most at the convention, Hamilton did not think the final product was perfect, but signed it anyway, feeling it a significant improvement over the Articles of Confederation.

Perhaps Hamilton's most famous contribution was his advocacy for the Constitution in the form of the Federalist Papers. He wrote 51 of the 85 essays, including the first. He pointed out the Confederation's inadequacies. He argued a stronger central government would improve the country's failing economy, protect against domestic insurrections like Shays' Rebellion, and defend against foreign threats like Great Britain and France. He justified the organization of the Senate, the executive and judicial branches, and the Electoral College. Though they were not incredibly influential at the time, the Federalist Papers would become the most cited guides for the Founding Fathers' intentions for the Constitution.

But while he was a prominent politician, Hamilton's calling was in finances. Robert Morris, Superintendent of Finance for the Confederation, recruited Hamilton to help him at the Bank of North America, dedicated to restructuring the country's currency, taxation, and other parts of the economy. Hamilton was one of the strongest supporters of Morris' proposed constitutional amendment, which would have allowed Congress to collect import duties. Congress was falling apart and was in desperate need of finances, which this tax would have helped with. Nearly every state was on board with it, but Rhode Island, who relied on imports for its economy, felt it would be unfairly impacted by the amendment and refused to ratify, killing it. Incidents like this were what turned Hamilton away from the Confederation and toward a stronger government.

Hamilton's most important role in government was as the country's first Secretary of the Treasury. President Washington originally suggested Morris, who turned him down and recommended Hamilton in his place. Hamilton was highly influential in Washington's cabinet, and was able to get him and Congress to support major economic legislation. He wrote several financial reports to Congress, on public credit, manufactures, mints, import duties, and national banks. Among his successful suggestions were import duties, an excise tax on whiskey, the federal government's assumption of state government debts to increase its credit, and the formation of a national bank, national mint, and the Revenue-Cutter Service. The National Bank system lasted over thirty years.

But Hamilton's presence in the new government was not limited to the treasury. His strong opinions on the ideal state of the economy, government, and American society combined with his influence and competence led to him forming one of the country's first political parties, the Federalists. They believed in a strong federal government, a national bank, high taxes, restrictive qualifications for voting, strong ties with Great Britain and weaker ties with France, and a permanent standing navy. Hamilton wrote instructions for John Jay to negotiate a controversial treaty with Great Britain. He wrote Washington's Farewell Address, one of the first president's most famous pieces of writing. As a strong partisan, Hamilton made his fair share of enemies, chief among them Thomas Jefferson, Washington's secretary of state. With opposing visions for their country's future, both fought to influence federal policy and tried to establish themselves as Washington's most trusted advisor. President John Adams, a Federalist himself, found Hamilton too radical and controlling. Hamilton attempted to sabotage Adams' re-election campaign by supporting Charles Pinckney for president instead. Nevertheless, Hamilton's military experience and his distrust of France led to Adams appointing him as senior major general of the US Army during the Quasi-War at Washington's insistence. And of course, he attracted the ire of Aaron Burr, who would do him in.

Hamilton was abolitionist, but unlike many of the most famous Founding Fathers he never actually owned any slaves himself. He saw slavery as contradictory to the ideals of the Revolution, and worked to recruit black troops with the promise of freedom. He joined the New York Manumission Society in 1785, the largest antislavery organization in New York. They successfully pushed for the international slave trade to be banned in the state, then slavery itself through gradual emancipation. Hamilton even believed that black peoples' "natural faculties are as good as ours," an uncommon view even among abolitionists. He supported the slave revolt in Haiti, supporting close economic and diplomatic ties with the new country, though he was unsuccessful. He did not want to deport freed slaves like many other antislavery people, such as Jefferson, did.

Hamilton is one of the most celebrated Founding Fathers, particularly when it comes to finance. His ideas would shape generations of economic policy. However, because most people find finance quite boring, as well as Hamilton's elitism, his popularity generally took a backseat to Washington, Jefferson, Franklin, and his other contemporaries. Still, many ships and schools have been named in his honor, several statues of him built, and most famously, his face placed on the $10 bill. However, his popularity surged with the release of Lin-Manuel Miranda's 2015 musical, Hamilton: An American Musical. Hamilton's newfound popularity was enough to save his face from being taken off the $10 bill.


Title: Battle of Sitka
Description: 


Title: Territory of Orleans organized
Description: 


Title: Election of 1804
Description: An election in which incumbent Democratic-Republican Thomas Jefferson was re-elected, beating Federalist candidate and NY Governor Charles C. Pinckney. John Adams had declined to run again, leaving the Federalists with his former running mate. Jefferson was nominated by his party without opposition. Though winning the 1800 Election by the slimmest of margins, Jefferson won by a landslide thanks to the Louisiana Purchase and a healthy economy. He ran with George Clinton, hoping to distance himself from his former vice president, Aaron Burr, who had recently killed Alexander Hamilton in a duel. The Federalists had been devastated by this loss, as Hamilton had been their party leader. They hurled more insults and accusations at Jefferson, much like what had been done in the last two elections. They claimed the Louisiana Purchase was unconstitutional (indeed, Jefferson had worried the same thing at the time) and accused Jefferson of sleeping with his slave, Sally Hemmings, but none of it stuck. Jefferson won every state but Connecticut and Delaware, even taking most of New England, traditionally a Federalist stronghold.

Main issues: Louisiana Purchase
Voter Turnout: 23.8%
Significance: first election after the ratification of the 12th Amendment


Title: Chatham Manor slave revolt
Description: 


Title: Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts established
Description: 


Title: Supreme Court Justice Samuel Chase acquitted of impeachment charges
Description: 


Title: <i>Essex</i> case
Description: 


Title: Yusluf Karamanli signs peace treaty
Description: 


Title: Michigan Territory organized
Description: 


Title: Noah Webster's <i>Compendious Dictionary of the English Language</i>
Description: 


Title: Virginia tightens slave laws
Description: 


Title: Construction of the Cumberland Road authorized
Description: 


Title: Non-importation Act
Description: 


Title: Pike Expedition
Description: 


Title: Monroe-Pinckney Treaty
Description: 


Title: Orders in Council
Description: 


Title: <b>Transatlantic slave trade abolished</b>
Description: Though slavery is widely abhorred in any form today, people in the late 18th and early 19th centuries felt differently. People who were willing to tolerate or even support slavery found the slave trade disgusting, and slave traders to be terrible people. Even worse was the transAtlantic slave trade. To them, it was one thing to be born into slavery, but quite another to be born free, then kidnapped and shipped overseas in a horribly-accomodated slave ship. Nevertheless, this practice had been continued for quite some time. In 1775, one in five people in the Thirteen Colonies were African, free or enslaved. During the Revolutionary War, the rebelling colonies all pledged to end their involvement in the transAtlantic slave trade. Most of them did. North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia reopened the trade after the war, but reclosed it in the 1790s. In 1803, South Carolina re-reopened the trade, and by 1807 was the only state that allowed it.

Article I, Section 9, Clause 1 of the Constitution denied Congress the power to ban the transAtlantic slave trade before the year 1808. However, Congress had already been passing laws restricting the transAtlantic slave trade or punishing those who participated in it. When it created the Mississippi Territory, it banned the transAtlantic slave trade there, as it was not a state. In 1800, Congress banned US citizens from participating or investing in the trade, meaning it had to be run exclusively through foreigners.

Their actions reflected a widely-shared opposition among Americans of the trade, for both moral and practical grounds. Northerners disliked the increase in Southern states' power in Congress  because of the Three-Fifths Clause. The Upper South states, like Virginia and Maryland, opposed it as well. Widespread farming of tobacco, a land-intensive crop, had depleted the nutrients in the soil. Agriculture in the area was declining, producing a surplus of slaves. Upper South slave-owners planned on selling their slaves to the Lower South, where the soil was still fertile, so demand for slaves was still high. TransAtlantically imported slaves would be competition in that market.

The desire to ban the trade was also influenced by international events. Great Britain was planning on banning the trade around the same time, and policing the Atlantic ocean to enforce it. America wanted to join Great Britain in one of the world's first international humanitarian efforts. The Haitian Revolution had also spooked Southerners, who began fearing that large numbers of African slaves May revolt and kill them as well. The Louisiana Purchase of 1803 also provided what was seen as an opportunity to extinguish slavery itself in America. A prevailing theory in the late 18th and early 19th centuries was that of "dispersal." It was thought that ending the transAtlantic slave trade and dispersing the slave population across a wide area would cause the black population to dwindle. Eventually, there would be none left, and slavery and (most) black people would be gone. Doubling the country's land seemed a prime opportunity to put the theory to test.

Efforts to ban the trade soon manifested in Congress. On March 3, 1805, Massachusetts Representative Joseph Bradley Varnum suggested a constitutional amendment to allow Congress to ban the trade. This was ignored, though, since Article V specifically bans amending Article I, Section 9, Clause 1. They would have to wait until the deadline to end it. On December 2, 1806, President Jefferson denounced the practice in his State of the Union address and congratulated the country on its enthusiasm to ban it. On March 2, the bill abolishing the transAtlantic slave trade, to take effect on January 1, 1808, the earliest day constitutionally allowed, passed both houses and was signed, all on the same day. There was some objection from Southern Congressmen. Virginia Representative John Randolph warned that this law might become the "pretext of universal emancipation" and that it would "blow up the Constitution." He predicted that any future disunion would be between free and slave states.

Of course, banning something does not make it go away. Slaves continued to be illegally imported, all the way until 1860. Most came into Spanish Florida and Texas before they joined the Union. Nevertheless, at this point the transAtlantic slave trade in the US was essentially dead. Imported slaves dropped from 14,000 a year to 1000. However, this promoted the growth of the domestic slave trade. A new status quo began to develop: states in the Upper South that relied less on slavery would sell slaves to the Lower South.


Title: <i>Chesapeake</i>-<i>Leopard</i> Affair
Description: A battle between the USS Chesapeake and the HMS Leopard, the latter of which was looking for deserters from the Navy. The Leopard caught the Chesapeake unprepared, and fired a few shots before the Americans surrendered. Three were killed in the attack, and four Americans were captured, one being hanged later. This upset the Americans who called for war briefly but gave up. Short-term, it created the Embargo Act of 1807, and was one of the causes of the War of 1812.


Title: First ever commercial steamboat service
Description: 


Title: Burr acquitted of treason
Description: Aaron Burr was arrested for treason against the United States, but was acquitted.

In 1804, after the Hamilton duel, Burr made contact with British minister Anthony Merry, where he proposed to assist Great Britain in taking western land from the US. Though Great Britain rejected the offer, Burr continued to gather support for his quest, including General James Wilkinson, the highest ranking officer in the US Army. In August 1806, Burr allegedly sent Wilkinson a letter, which the general used to betray Burr. He sent President Jefferson the letter as a warning that Burr was conspiring against the government. Jefferson sent militiamen to raid his outpost and many of Burr's volunteers abandoned him. Burr was captured in Alabama and arrested for treason. Though the accusations against Burr were often vague or contradictory, everyone maintained he was the ringleader. Additionally, there was no consensus on what Burr was planning, as Burr himself told people varying stories, while others still suspected he had other goals in mind.
Burr's lawyers proved that the letter Wilkinson provided was falsified, and anyway Burr's crime didn't meet the constitutional requirements for treason. There was no evidence that he had taken up arms against the US government.


Title: Embargo Act of 1807
Description: An embargo on Great Britain and France enacted to punish the two for violation of US neutrality during the Napoleonic Wars, such as British impressment. However, the embargo failed to affect the two countries significantly, and seriously harmed the US economy. It was eventually repealed on March 1, 1809.


Title: American Fur Company founded
Description: 


Title: Election of 1808
Description: An election in which Democratic-Republican James Madison beat Federalist Charles C. Pinckney and became the 4th president. Jefferson endorsed Madison, his secretary of state, securing his nomination, while the Federalists ran Pinckney again. The Republicans suffered criticism of the Embargo Act of 1807, a ban on trade with Europe passed by the Jefferson Administration. This hurt New England disproportionately, which was a traditional Federalist stronghold. Nevertheless, Jefferson was still popular among most Americans, allowing Madison to handily defeat Pinckney. Notably, some of the New York delegates voted for Clinton for president, despite him running for vice president.

Main issues: Embargo Act
Voter Turnout: 36.8% (record)
Significance: First election in which the victor was of the same party as his predecessor
One of two instances in which a new president was elected but the vice president was re-elected


Title: Treaty of Fort Clark
Description: 


Title: Robert Fulton's steamboat patented
Description: 


Title: Illinois Territory organized
Description: 


Title: Madison Administration
Description: President: James Madison Jr.
Number: 4
Party: Democratic-Republican
Home State: Virginia
Vice President: George Clinton (1809 - 12)
Elbridge Gerry (until 1814)
Secretary of State: James Monroe

Previous Occupations:
VA Congressional delegate (1781-83, 1786-87)
VA Congressman (1789-97)
Secretary of State (1801-09)

Congressional Majority Parties: (Senate / House)
11th Congress: Democratic-Republican / Democratic-Republican
12th Congress: Democratic-Republican / Democratic-Republican
13th Congress: Democratic-Republican / Democratic-Republican
14th Congress: Democratic-Republican / Democratic-Republican

Chief Justice: John Marshall

Notable Qualities:
Shortest president
Only president to have had the White House burned down while in office
First Congress to officially declare war


Title: Non-Intercourse Act
Description: 


Title: Mary Kies becomes the first woman to be issued a US patent
Description: 


Title: <i>Fletcher v. Peck</i>
Description: A landmark Supreme Court case in which the Court granted itself the power of judicial review over state laws. The actual case revolved around the Yazoo land claimed by Georgia (modern-day Mississippi and Alabama). A land act was revealed to be fraudulent, and was nullified by the next politicians that assumed Georgian office. While the land act was still in effect, speculator Robert Fletcher purchased land from fellow speculator John Peck. Fletcher filed a lawsuit, claiming Peck didn't have rights to the land when he sold it. In a 9-0 vote, the Marshall Supreme Court ruled that the contract could not be repealed, even if it was created through fraud. Through this, the Supreme Court granted themselves the power to uphold or nullify the laws of states based on their constitutionality, known as judicial review. This power had been expanded through this case from just over federal laws, granted in <i>Marbury v. Madison</i>.


Title: Titles of Nobility Amendment passes Congress
Description: 


Title: Macon's Bill No. 2
Description: 


Title: Pacific Fur Company founded
Description: 


Title: Tecumseh's War
Description: A conflict between the US and a Native American confederacy led by the Shawnee leader Tecumseh. It started with the negotiation of the Treaty of Fort Wayne, conducted between William Henry Harrison and several Native American tribes. They eventually agreed to sell Native American land in Indiana Territory in exchange for money. Tecumseh, not present at the treaty, was outraged and insisted the treaty was illegitimate. In August 1810, Tecumseh and 400 warriors marched to meet with Harrison, insisting they not sell the land. Harrison told him the tribes could sell their own land if they wished. Tecumseh proceeded to gather support for his confederacy. The war climaxed with the Battle of Tippecanoe, a resounding defeat for Tecumseh's confederacy. Later, he allied with the British in the War of 1812, fighting to defend Canada to secure Native American rights until his death at the Battle of the Thames in 1813.


Title: Census of 1810
Description: State populations:
1) Virginia 983,000
2) New York 959,000
3) Pennsylvania 810,000
4) Massachusetts 701,000
5) North Carolina with 557,000

Kentucky was the most populous western state at 407,000, #7 in total.

13) Ohio 231,000
14) Vermont 218,000
15) New Hampshire 214,000
16) Rhode Island 77,000
17) Delaware 73,000

City populations
1) New York City 96,000
2) Philadelphia 53,000
3) Baltimore 47,000
4) Boston 34,000
5) Charleston 25,000

New Orleans was the largest city in the west, with 17,000 people, #7 in total.

There were 28,000 slaves in the North and 1.2 million in the South. The percentage of free blacks in the Upper South increased from less than 1% before the Revolutionary War to 10%.


Title: Mexican War of Independence
Description: 


Title: West Florida annexed
Description: 


Title: 1811 German Coast Uprising
Description: A 3-day slave revolt in Louisiana. A few hundred slaves Marched on various sugar plantations and set fire to them. On January 10, the American militia was sent in, which proceeded to destroy the rebellion. It is the largest slave revolt in American history.

Casualties:
95 rebel slaves
2 whites


Title: Fort Astoria established
Description: 


Title: <i>Little Belt</i> Affair
Description: 


Title: Battle of Woody Point
Description: 


Title: Steam-powered ferry service begins between New York and New Jersey
Description: 


Title: <b>Battle of Tippecanoe</b>
Description: The largest battle in Tecumseh's War, fought while Tecumseh was away collecting recruits. Governor William Henry Harrison had Marched his 1000 troops to Prophetstown, where the confederacy base was located. The confederate army was temporarily headed by Tecumseh's brother Tenskwatawa ("The Prophet"), a spiritual but not military leader. Harrison planned to negotiate with Tenskwatawa, but instead the Native American forces attacked Harrison's army, who successfully repelled them and forced them to abandon Prophetstown. They then burned the town to the ground. A crushing 
defeat for the confederacy, Harrison earned his nickname "Tippecanoe" and Tenskwatawa lost the respect of his brother. The British was blamed for the conflict because they had been supplying Tecumseh's troops, and so was one of the causes of the War of 1812.

Casualties:
63 US troops killed
123 US troops wounded
50-65 Native American warriors killed
70-80 Native American warriors wounded


Title: Henry Clay becomes Speaker of the House
Description: 


Title: New Madrid earthquakes
Description: 


Title: Fort Ross established
Description: 


Title: Henry Letters exposed
Description: 


Title: Vice President George Clinton dies
Description: 


Title: Louisiana becomes a state
Description: Louisiana (LA) joins the US as the 9th slave state and the 18th state overall.


Title: Spencer Perceval assassinated
Description: 


Title: Missouri Territory organized
Description: 


Title: <b>War of 1812</b>
Description: The 1783 Treaty of Paris was the end of the Revolutionary War and Great Britain's official recognition of American independence, but the two countries' hostilities were far from over. Great Britain (the UK after 1801) and France were at war or high tension from 1793 to 1815, nearly twenty years. As the two largest foreign nations relevant to American interests, the US was always finding itself caught in the middle.

By far Americans were most outraged at the British policy of impressment. Desperate for crew to man their ships in the navy, the British would often pull over neutral ships, forcefully take British subjects off, and conscript, or "impress," them into service. The US Merchant Marine, a massive shipping fleet, included 23,000 British sailors among its crews, nearly a third of its total staff. Not wanting to be impressed, those sailors often pretended to be American when pulled over. In those days, documentation was sparse, and Americans being descendants of British colonists made it easy for Brits to blend in. The UK caught wind of this and began impressing sailors they suspected of being British. However, because of the similarities between Brits and Americans, sometimes they would take a genuine American instead. It is estimated that about 6000 Americans were wrongfully impressed into the British Navy from 1807 to 1812. To Americans, this amounted to kidnapping, and the practice was unpopular even in the UK, but many dealt with it, seeing it as a necessary casualty of the war effort. Impressment of American sailors was nearly always cited contemporaneously as the primary motivation for war.

There was also the matter of American trade with the UK and France. Great Britain was by far America's biggest trading partner, buying 80% of cotton exports and 50% of all other exports. When Great Britain and France went to war in 1793, neutral Americans made large profits selling to both sides. The British argued that under their Rule of 1756, which America had agreed to follow under Jay's Treaty, forbade them from trading with enemy nations like France in wartime. America argued the Rule of 1756 violated its sovereignty over its trade policies, and challenged it in the Essex case in 1805, but lost. In 1806, Napoleon issued the Berlin Decree, a blockade of British ports, including neutral vessels. The next year, the UK issued the Orders in Council, which did the same for French ports. Also in 1807, Napoleon declared that any ships found in British ports, including neutral ones, were legitimate prizes of war and so could be captured by French forces. American ships attempted to trade regardless, but over 700 were seized by the two European nations under their new decrees. About 2/3 were captured by the British, but American traders were at least compensated for their loss, which was not the case with French captures. French relations with the US had soured significantly since the Revolutionary War, especially after Jay's Treaty. The US attempted to punish Great Britain and France with a series of embargoes, which failed spectacularly and only damaged the American economy.

A third motivation centered around American Indians. Most Indians in and around the US sided with Great Britain during the Revolutionary War, hoping they would keep their policy of restricting expansion past the Appalachian Mountains. Since the war, the British had hoped to create an Indian buffer state in the American northwest, around the Great Lakes. This buffer state would contain American expansion and be friendly with Great Britain, giving them an inlet to the fur trade. To build relations with Indians, the British sometimes supplied weapons and ammunition, which they would then use in raids against Americans.

Much of the war was over honor. Simply put, America did not feel that the British respected them as a sovereign nation. The way they saw it, Great Britain was a powerful empire whose reach spanned the seas, and they were used to interfering in foreign affairs and bullying weaker countries. Indians were raiding American settlements with British weaponry. In 1807, British ship the Leopard approached American vessel the Chesapeake, fired at it without provocation, boarded it and demanded the surrender of British subjects to be impressed. The Chesapeake, caught off-guard and outgunned, quickly surrendered. Americans saw this as a humiliation and a violation of sovereignty. Four years later, American ship the President shot at British sloop the Little Belt and heavily damaged it, possibly unprovoked. Much of the anti-British rhetoric that went into declaring war centered around a lack of respect for their new country. Many in Congress called it "the second war of independence," a conflict that would truly break America free from British shackles.

Finally, there was some motivation around US expansion. The US hoped to break Indian power in the northwest and allow settlers to move in there. They wanted British influence out of the region. They also hoped to invade and annex Canada, then multiple British colonies. Canada comprised an upper and lower part, with Upper Canada ironically being south of Lower Canada. Upper Canada was the Great Lakes region, and Lower Canada was the St. Lawrence River area. Not only would conquering Canada remove the British from North America, they would acquire tens of thousands of people who shared a similar background to America. America would gain complete control over all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River. They believed annexation would be popular among Canadians themselves, but this was a miscalculation. The vast majority of Canadians were Loyalists, British colonists who fled America during the Revolution. As such, they wanted nothing to do with America. Not every American was on board with this idea, either. Many Southerners opposed adding many new free states, which would upset the free-slave state balance. However, other Southerners saw it as necessary to preserve the balance, as they thought many new slaves states would be added in southeast Louisiana. Many Canadians spoke French and practiced Catholicism, which many in the US saw as antithetical to American culture and ideals.  Federalists were staunchly opposed to both war and annexation, but in Congress and the country they were in the minority. Historians generally agree that expansion was not a true cause of the war, but rather an enticing consequence.

As for the British, their primary motivations were to defend Canada, defeat Napoleon more easily, and create the aforementioned Indian buffer state. They were not going to stand idly by while their subjects were invaded and conquered by another country. But their primary goal was to defeat Napoleon, whom the Britsh viewed as an existential threat. Napoleon was a formidible adversary, and American sales of supplies to the French were not helping. The British wanted the US to get out of the way so they could defeat France. They did not wish to recolonize the US, as at this point Americans were too far removed from the British.

On June 1, 1812, President Madison relayed a message to Congress, citing grievances against the UK. Congress then debated for several days over whether to declare their first official war. As mentioned, nearly all Federalists were strongly opposed, favoring good relations with the British, but they were in the minority. Those most in favor of conflict were called the War Hawks. Among them were recently-elected Congressmen John C. Calhoun and Henry Clay, the latter of whom was the Speaker of the House, who would go on to become leading statesmen. The result was far from unanimous: 79 to 49 (61%) in the House of Representatives, and 19 to 13 (59%) in the Senate. Nevertheless, the declaration passed, citing mainly impressment and naval blockades. America was in its first official war, and with the world's foremost naval power at that. Ironically, one of the main motivations behind the war had already been resolved before war was declared. In 1812, Tory Prime Minister Spencer Perceval was assassinated, and replaced by Lord Liverpool. Liverpool wanted a better relationship with the US, and had the Orders in Council repealed. However, because of the days it took for news to travel across the Atlantic, Congress was not aware of this repeal when they declared war.

Neither side was really ready for war at that point. In an all-out fight, the US would have stood no chance against the might of the British army and navy. However, Britain's main concern was fighting Napoleon, so most of their forces were in Europe. Canada had just 6000 British troops. The US had 12,000 troops, still quite small for a war. Militiamen generally refused to fight outside of their states, and in New England, where the war was especially unpopular, many militia companies refused to step foot into Canada, seeing it as an unjust invasion. Though the Royal Navy was mostly occupied with France, it was more than a match for the US Navy, which consisted of a whopping eight ships.

The war began with a US invasion of Upper Canada, led by Brigadier General William Hull. He boldly declared to the British troops in Canada that they surrender lest they face "the horrors, and calamities of war." He told the Canadians that he was there as their liberator. He was under the impression that Canadians would be enthusiastic to join him, but he turned out to be way off. His proclamation only incensed Canadians against America. He arrived at Sandwich, just across the Detroit River, on July 12, but was unable to make much progress. His forces were small and mainly untrained militiamen. He fell back to Fort Detroit on August 7 after learning his supply line had been attacked by Shawnee, British allies. British Major General Isaac Brock, in charge of Canadian defense, went on the offensive. He moved on Fort Detroit and began a siege. Brock warned Hull that his Indian allies were out of his control and may slaughter Hull's men if he did not surrender. On August 16, Hull gave in, saving his 2500 soldiers and 700 civilians. He also ordered the surrender of Fort Dearborn at modern-day Chicago. Hull's higher-ups were not impressed. In 1814, he was court-martialed, found guilty of cowardice and neglect of duty, and sentenced to be executed. Madison would later commute it to military discharge. On October 13, 1812, American Major General Stephen Van Rensselaer made a second attempt at Canada, crossing the Niagara River. He and Lieutenant Colonel Winfield Scott fought with 3500 men against Brock's 1300 at the Battle of Queenston Heights, the first major battle of the war. Despite the numerical advantage, the poorly trained militia were repelled, though Brock was killed in the fighting. US Major General Henry Dearborn made a third attempt at Canada in November, this time north of Lake Champlain, but his militiamen refused to cross the border.

Major General William Henry Harrison took over from Hull in the Northwest. Despite the rocky start, further fighting around the Great Lakes would result in few gains for either side. Early on in the war, US Commodore Isaac Chauncey built a shipyawrd at Sackett's Harbor on the northeastern shore of Lake Ontario in New York. There, 3000 men worked on warships to build up the US navy. They built the warship USS Madison in 45 days, the first of eleven additional warships. They took control of Lake Ontario and captured York (now Toronto), the capital of Upper Canada, on April 27, 1813. The Americans burned the town and left after a few days. The Americans pushed further into Upper Canada, taking Forts George and Erie just across the Detroit and Niagara Rivers, respectively. They were defeated at Stoney Creek on June 6, and again at Beavers Dam on June 24. The Americans ended their advance and abandoned Fort Erie on June 9. After so many failed attempts at taking what they had expected to be an easy campaign, American morale was low. It improved when US Captain Oliver Perry took control of Lake Erie on September 10. On September 26, Harrison recaptured Detroit, which the British had taken early on. British and Indian attacks in Ohio were repelled in late July and early August. In a major US victory, Indian Confederate leader Tecumseh was killed at the Battle of the Thames just north of Lake Erie on October 5. The tide turned again later that year, as the American abandoned Fort George, retreated across the Niagara River, then lost Fort Niagara. They burned the town of Newark, prompting the British to do the same to Lewiston and Buffalo in New York. In July 1814, the Americans began their final invasion of Upper Canada. On July 3, they recaptured Fort Erie. Two days later, they fought at Chippawa on the western shore of the Niagara River and won. The advance culminated with the Battle of Lundy's Lane on July 25. On the Canadian side of Niagara Falls, 2500 Americans fought 3500 British and Canadian soldiers in one of the largest and deadliest battles in the war. Both sides suffered hundreds of casualties, and there was no clear victor. However, the losses forced America to retreat, ending their last advance. They fell back to Fort Erie, where they were besieged by 4800 British soldiers. On the night of August 15, British General Gordon Drummond ordered a large attack on the fort and was repelled. The British continued the siege for another month, but the soldiers began falling ill from disease and exposure. On September 17, the Americans led a large attack from the fort, not knowing that the British had just ordered a retreat. When the siege ended, both sides had suffered over a thousand casualties, but it was the British who had to retreat. On October 19, the Americans defeated the British at Cook's Mills west of Fort Erie in one of the last battles around the Niagara River. On November 5, with winter coming and news of a British invasion of New England, the Americans destroyed Fort Erie and moved to Buffalo.

The Americans conducted a separate invasion of the St. Lawrence River, which ran through Lower Canada and northeastern Upper Canada. This one went even worse than the main Upper Canada campaign. The Americans repeatedly moved on settlements along the river and were defeated every time: at Ogdensburg on February 22, at the Chateauguay River on October 25, and at Crysler's Farm on November 11. On March 30, 1814, US General James WIlkinson, who had lost at Crysler's Farm, lost again at Lacolle Mills, and resigned. The British then began easily taking contested territory around the Maine-Canadian border. However, their attack was halted at the Battle of Plattsburgh on September 11, 1814, where US Master Commandant Thomas Macdonough defeated British Captain George Downie on Lake Champlain. Americans gained control of the lake and stopped the British advance into New England. Just like the Great Lakes campaign, both sides attempted to push into enemy territory and were stopped quickly.

Battles out west, though less consequential and less frequent, were going even worse. In September 1813, repeated attacks from British-allied Sauks forced Americans to abandon Fort Madison on the Mississippi River in modern-day Iowa. Throughout mid-1814, Indians and Brits pushed further down the Upper Mississippi, approaching St. Louis.

As mentioned, the pride of the British military was its navy. It boasted over 600 ships, while the Americans had scarcely more than a dozen, even after it began building more ships for the war. Nevertheless, these new ships were bigger and staffed by better-trained men than their British counterparts. There was no grand naval engagement, buth rather a lot of single-ship fights. The USS United States beat the HMS Macedonian, and famously, the USS Constitution easily defeated the HMS Gurriere. The rest of the Atlantic engagements were American losses: The USS Chesapeake was lost to the HMS Shannon, the USS Essex to the HMS Phoebe, and the USS President to the HMS Endymion. Most of the American naval fighting was by privateers, who saw much more success than the US Navy. Together, they captured over 1300 British merchant ships, though over half were retaken, and the remaining captures had little effect on the British supply chain. Meanwhile, the British were busy blockading the East Coast. They started in the South in late 1812, and expanded it as the war went on. 4000 slaves escaped Southern plantations and boarded these ships, gaining their freedom when they reached British soil. The blockade proved to be effective, preventing American ships from leaving port and restraining their trade.

The Southern campaign was the most successful for the Americans. It was largely a separate war, not involving the British and starting a year later. Tecumseh had incensed the Upper Creeks, also called the Red Sticks, against the US. Major General Andrew jackson allied with the US-friendly Lower Creeks and delivered a series of decisive defeats to the Red Sticks.

By mid-1814, things started to take a turn for the worse for the US. In April, Napoleon abdicated, temporarily ending the war against France. The UK could now turn their full might on the US. Realizing their situation, America began suing for peace. Three days after Napoleon's abdication, Congress repealed the Embargo and Nonimportation Acts. On August 8, the two sides began negotiating peace in Ghent, Belgium. However, this would take time, and the war would continue in the meantime. Thousands of British troops began arriving to the continent, and the British began their invasion of the Chesapeake region. They easily made it through the bay and began heading to Washington. On August 24, they captured the capital city, setting fire to the Capitol, White House, and other buildings. Pre-empting this, many of the country's most important documents, like the original Constitution, had been moved to Leesburg, Virginia. Federal officials fled to Virginia. In September, the British moved on Baltimore, the largest city in the Chesapeake. The Americans were able to fend them off, and even killed Major General Robert Ross, commander of the British Army in North America. The Americans defended Fort McHenry at Baltimore Harbor from naval bombardment. Watching this battle from afar, American lawyer Francis Scott Key wrote a poem that would become the country's national anthem. Despite the renewed British offensivse and the burning of Washington, they had made little progress. The attack from Canada had been halted at Plattsburgh, and the offensive in the Chesapeake left after Ross was killed. They had yet to hear back about the third offensive in the South.

All the while, negotiations at Ghent continued. Both the British and Americans realized that they had made little progress, and were hurting themselves economically by not trading with each other. Since the war with France was over, the British had no need for impressing American sailors. They had also become preoccupied with rebuilding Europe in the wake of France's defeat. They agreed to restore the borders to their prewar states, and all prisoners were to be returned to their respective sides. The UK would drop its demands for an Indian buffer state and compensate American slave masters for their escaped slaves. though they would not follow this last point. The treaty was signed in late December 1814, and quickly ratified.

Even after the war was technically over, fighting continued. The war had begun partially because of slow communication, and some of the most important events would happen afterward because of slow communication. In January 1815, that last British offensive in the South would end in an upset defeat. The offensive was to culminate in the capture of New Orleans and the mouth of the Mississippi along with it. Jackson, who was conducing the American strategy in the South, moved into the city to prepare for battle. He assembled a ragtag group of regulars, militiamen, pirates, merchants, and slaves to fend off the superior British force. Jackson successfully defended the city on January 8, inflicting heavy casualties while losing few himself. When news broke out about the victory, the country erupted in celebration. This was just the kind of victory they had been hoping for. Jackson was catapulted into national fame, and despite the return to the status quo, Americans came away from the war with a good feeling. Their grievances had been ended, and their honor had been defended. At the same time, a group of prominent Federalists held a convention at Hartford, Connecticut. They had never supported the war in the first place, and complained about it further at the convention. When news broke out about the peace and Jackson's victory, the Federalists were seen as unpatriotic, losing them what little support they had left. The Federalist Party effectively dissolved soon after that.

As mentioned, the war was officially a draw, but Americans felt that they had won. Though they failed to take Canada, they had stopped every British offensive, held their own against the mighty Royal Navy, and saw the end to the trading restrictions, impressment, and British supplying of Indian raids. Of course, much of this was due to the war in France instead, but it felt like a victory nonetheless. They felt as if, because they had performed well against such a powerful empire, the British had to respect them now. Americans nationwide now recognized the need for a standing navy. Most consequentially, Indian power had been broken for good. Many Indians would wage war against the US in the future, but never again would they pose a serious threat like they had under Metacom, Pontiac, or Tecumseh. In return, over 30,000 people died, including 15,000 Americans, making it the seventh-deadliest war in the country's history. Despite this, the War of 1812 is not very present in the US conscious, being overshadowed by the Revolutionary War and Civil War that surrounded it. The war was more important to the Indians living between the Mississippi and Appalachians, who lost support from the British for an officially-recognized state in the north. They would see decades of removal from their ancestral homelands. The war is also important to Canadians, who fondly remember this as a time when they defeated the US and burned their capital. Of course, most of this was actually done by British soldiers, but their participation in the war helped solidify a Canadian identity nonetheless. This was the last time the US fought the British in war, though it was not the end to their hostilities.

Deaths:
~15,000 Americans
~10,000 British
~10,000 Native Americans


Title: The UK removes restrictions on US commerce
Description: 


Title: Gutiérrez-Magee Filibuster
Description: 


Title: British capture Fort Detroit
Description: 


Title: <i>Constitution</i> vs <i>Guerriere</i>
Description: A naval battle between the USS Constitution and the HMS Guerriere as part of the War of 1812. The Constitution, a much larger and more well-armed ship, outmatched the Guerriere and defeated it. After the first cannonball fired at the Constitution failed to inflict any damage, one of its crew members claimed its sides were made of iron, giving the ship the nickname "Old Ironsides." The loss was fairly inconsequential for the British, but it proved to be a huge rallying point for the Americans in terms of war morale. The public became energized in a spirit of nationalism, believing their modestly sized navy had crushed the all-powerful Royal Navy in a fair fight.

Casualties:
7 US soldiers killed
7 US soldiers wounded
15 British soldiers killed
78 British soldiers wounded
257 British soldiers captured


Title: Battle of Queenston Heights
Description: 


Title: Election of 1812
Description: An election in which incumbent Democratic-Republican James Madison was re-elected, defeating Federalist DeWitt Clinton. Northern Republicans wanted someone other than a Virginian to be their nominee, so they rallied first behind Vice President George Clinton, then his nephew DeWitt. The schism grew when the New York caucus nearly unanimously voted for Clinton for nominee, as it was filled with Republicans opposed to the new War of 1812 started by Madison. Nevertheless, Madison was elected the nominee, though not by the landslide expected from incumbents. The Federalists originally planned on running John Marshall, but with so much support for Clinton in New York they could not count on a victory there, which could result in a 3-way tie. This would put the election in the hands of the Republican-controlled House of Representatives, who would surely vote in Madison. Eventually, Clinton was voted in as nominee, though there was much bitter debate and disagreement from various states, such as Virginia, who voted for Rufus King in the primaries instead. Less emphasis was put on the campaigns in this election, with the war taking the spotlight. Madison swept the South, while Clinton took New England (except for Vermont). The election came down to New York and Pennsylvania, both of which Clinton needed to win. He won in his home state of New York, but lost Pennsylvania and the presidency to Madison.


Main issues: War of 1812
Voter Turnout: 40.4% (record)
Significance: First election in which New York controlled the most electoral votes (taking over from Virginia)


Title: Creek War
Description: A war between opposing Creek factions, the Red Sticks and the Lower Creeks. The latter was backed by local US militias, while the former was supplied by British and Spanish. As the US continued to expand west, the Creek tribe in the South began to splinter. The progressive Lower Creeks started to assimilate into Western culture, while the nativist Red Sticks resisted change, and rallied around Tecumseh. Red Sticks proceeded to attack Lower Creeks, then their conflict with white militia began on July 21 in the Battle of Burnt Corn. On August 30, 1813, the Red Sticks killed several hundred at Fort Mims in the Fort Mims Massacre, which encouraged more Americans into the war, and also soured relations with the friendly Lower Creeks. A notable commander was Colonel Andrew Jackson, who led military campaigns in Tennessee. His battalion suffered from supply shortages and low enlistment numbers, but eventually he managed to get the Red Sticks to surrender. Despite the alliance with the Lower Creeks, Jackson forced the tribe to cede 21 million acres of Creek land in Georgia and Alabama. This war helped Jackson to become a national hero, and helped him win the 1828 and 1832 elections.

Deaths:
~575 Americans/Lower Creek
~1600 Red Stick


Title: Battle of York
Description: 


Title: US capture of Fort George
Description: 


Title: Battle of Stoney Creek
Description: 


Title: Battle of Lake Erie
Description: 


Title: Americans recapture Detroit
Description: 


Title: Battle of the Thames
Description: 


Title: Battle of Chateauguay
Description: 


Title: Battle of Crysler's Farm
Description: 


Title: Battle of Longwoods
Description: 


Title: Battle of Horseshoe Bend
Description: 


Title: Battle of Chippawa
Description: 


Title: Battle of Lundy's Lane
Description: 


Title: Battle of Fort Erie
Description: 


Title: Burning of Washington
Description: A British invasion of Washington DC, the US capital, as part of the War of 1812. British General Robert Ross led troops into the city and occupied it, burning down the White House and other government buildings. They reMained there for just over a day (26 hours) before a sudden hurricane-level storm set in and put out the fires, as well as generating a tornado that forced the British to retreat. This marks the only time Washington DC was occupied by a foreign nation (the British had also occupied Philadelphia, then the US capital, during the American Revolutionary War).


Title: Battle of Plattsburgh
Description: 


Title: Battle of North Point
Description: 


Title: Francis Scott Key's <i>Star-Spangled Banner</i>
Description: Francis Scott Key watches the Battle at Fort McHenry and writes the poem "The Star Spangled Banner," that would later be adopted as the US National Anthem. Fort McHenry was part of the Battle of Baltimore, where British forces bombarded the fort, but could not destroy it. Key was on a diplomatic mission to secure the release of Dr. William Beanes from the British. They agreed, but Key had to stay with the British until the battle was over. On a ship nearby, Key saw the 30ft x 42ft US flag and was inspired to write the poem.

Full text: https://bit.ly/2MVLsme


Title: Battle of Baltimore
Description: 


Title: Vice President Elbridge Gerry dies
Description: 


Title: Hartford Convention
Description: A series of meetings in which the Federalist Party discussed their various grievances, including the Louisiana Purchase and Embargo Act of 1807. They discussed repealing the 3/5 Compromise and requiring a 2/3 vote for admission of new states, declaration of war, and laws restricting trade. The Battle of New Orleans brought disgrace to the Federalists by making them seem anti-American, and was the source of the party's downfall.


Title: Treaty of Ghent
Description: A treaty signed formally ending the War of 1812. However, due to slow communications the war continued for a couple more months. All land taken during the war was restored, re-establishing all pre-war boundaries. Great Britain sold captured slaves back to the US, and both nations pledged to end the international slave trade in their countries.


Title: Era of Good Feelings
Description: A period in which there was only one dominant political party (the Democratic-Republicans). Often synonymous with Monroe's presidency.


Title: <b>Battle of New Orleans</b>
Description: The last major battle of the War of 1812, between US troops led by Brevet Major General Andrew Jackson and British troops led by Major General Sir Edward Pakenham. Pakenham led his troops to take New Orleans, LA, as it was a valuable supply line for the US. Jackson quickly mustered a force of 4500 men, including US soldiers, militiamen, and just regular citizens. He faced Pakenham's 8000-strong force that had just finished fighting the Napoleonic War. Jackson first attacked at night, then fell back to Rodriguez Canal, where he had his men dig the canal still deeper and use the excess dirt to make a wall, which connected a large marsh to the Mississippi River. 5000 British troops led by Colonel Robert Rennie pushed through Jackson's defensive line, but was quickly cut down along with most of his men. Meanwhile. Jackson, gleeful to exact his revenge for being imprisoned by the British during the Revolutionary War, inflicted heavy casualties on Pakenham's forces, including Pakenham himself. The British lost 3 generals and 7 colonels among their dead.

It was a huge victory for the Americans, which elevated their national pride to unforeseen levels. They believed the war to be an American victory, though the Treaty of Ghent established it as a stalemate. Jackson became a national hero, which helped him to win the presidential election in 1828.

Deaths:
13 US troops killed
30 US troops wounded
19 US troops missing/captured

285 British troops killed
1265 British troops wounded
484 British troops missing/captured


Title: First railroad charter
Description: 


Title: Second Barbary War
Description: 


Title: George Boxley's failed slave revolt
Description: 


Title: Great September Gail of 1815
Description: 


Title: American System
Description: The American System was proposed by President James Madison in his annual address to Congress in 1815. It was an economic plan created by Speaker of the House Henry Clay, and was heavily inspired off of Hamilton's Economic Plan from 1790. It proposed three main points:
1) A tariff on manufactured good to protect American industries
2) The charter of a Second National Bank to replace the first
3) Federal financing of a network of roads and canals

President Madison would later accept the first two, but vetoed the third on the grounds of his strict constructionist views preventing him to exercise a power not explicitly granted to him by the Constitution (which the financing of roads and canals was not covered in). However, these transportation networks were later financed at the state level.


Title: The Handel and Haydn Society, the oldest continuously performing arts organization, gives its first performance
Description: 


Title: Second National Bank
Description: 


Title: Tariff of 1816
Description: The first Congressional tariff that protected US manufacturing industries from international competition. It was the only tariff the South supported in the "Tariff War" from 1816 to 1846. As a protective measure, the tariff legislation. It placed a tax of 25% on textiles for three years, at which time it would drop to 20%. Iron, leather, hats, writing paper and cabinet ware were taxed at 30%, while sugar was taxed at 3¢/lb.


Title: First Seminole War
Description: A conflict between the Seminole and the US in Florida. In 1814, while Great Britain was still fighting the US, they recruited some Native American tribes and gave them forts. The Seminole were uninterested in the fort, so it was given to rebel slaves, giving the fort the name "Negro Fort." Colonel Clinch sailed over and blew up the fort, killing around 300. In November 1817, Americans drove the Mikasuki out of Fowltown. A week later, Seminole attacked a ship of 50 vulnerable Americans in the Scott Massacre. In March 1818, General Jackson invaded Florida and attacked a lot of Seminole villages. He also executed a Scottish trader that was dealing arms to the Seminole and a British agent. The British considered retaliating, but the US was too valuable to their economy. The Spanish could not maintain Florida very well, so they decided to continue negotiations to sell it, leading to the Adams-Onís Treaty of 1819. Congress tried to reprimand Jackson for the executions, but it didn't really work.


Title: Election of 1816
Description: An election in which Democratic-Republican James Monroe defeated Federalist Rufus King and became the 5th president. James Madison declined to run for a third term, following the precedent of Washington and Jefferson. He and Jefferson supported Monroe to become the Republican nominee, beating out William Crawford. The Federalists, who had not seen any presidents from their party since John Adams, fielded Rufus King. Monroe ran with Daniel D. Tompkins, while King selected John E. Howard as his running mate. The election was fairly one-sided; Democratic-Republicans received credit for ending the War of 1812 in a pseudo-victory, while the Federalists lost nearly all of their support after the 1814 Hartford Convention, which made them appear unpatriotic in the aftermath of the war. Madison had also implemented several key Federalist policies during his presidency, such as protective tariffs. This left the Federalists with little to campaign on to distinguish themselves from the Republicans. Indeed, not even King believed he had much of a chance of winning, and did not take the election seriously. There was a dispute in Congress over whether or not to count Indiana's votes, as they had officially become a state a few weeks after the final ballots were cast. They decided to count them, claiming that the resolution passed in late December was actually recognizing that Indian had been an official state since June of that year. Monroe swept most of the country, taking every state but Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Delaware.

Main issues: War of 1812, Hartford Convention
Voter turnout: 16.9%
Significance: Last election in which the Federalists fielded a candidate


Title: Indiana becomes a state
Description: Indiana (IN) joins the US as the 10th free state and the 19th state overall.


Title: American Colonization Society founded
Description: 


Title: Treaty of St. Louis (1816)
Description: 


Title: Alabama Territory organized
Description: 


Title: Monroe Administration
Description: President: James Monroe
Number: 5
Party: Democratic-Republican
Home State: Virginia
Vice President: Daniel D. Tompkins
Secretary of State: John Quincy Adams

Previous Occupations:
VA Congressional delegate (1783-86)
VA Senator (1790-94)
Minister to France (1794-96)
Minister to the UK (1803-07)
VA Governor (1799-1802, 1811)
Secretary of State (1811-17)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
15th Congress: Democratic-Republican / Democratic-Republican
16th Congress: Democratic-Republican / Democratic-Republican
17th Congress: Democratic-Republican / Democratic-Republican
18th Congress: Democratic-Republican / Democratic-Republican

Chief Justice: John Marshall

Notable Qualities:
Only president during the Era of Good Feelings
Had two of the most landslide presidential elections after Washington


Title: First mental hospital opened
Description: 


Title: Construction of the Erie Canal begins
Description: 


Title: Mississippi becomes a state
Description: Mississippi (MS) joins the US as the 10th slave state and the 19th state overall.


Title: 20 star, 13 stripe US flag adopted
Description: 


Title: Treaty of 1818
Description: A treaty signed between the US and the UK primarily to settle boundary disputes. It allowed for the joint occupation of the Oregon Country for 10 years. It also set the national border along "a line drawn from the most northwestern point of the Lake of the Woods, [due south, then] along the 49th parallel of north latitude..." to the "Stony [Rocky] Mountains." In doing this, the UK ceded the part of Rupert's Land and Red River Colony below the line (containing parts of modern-day Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, and a bit of Montana), while the US ceded a small portion of the Louisiana Purchase above the line.


Title: Illinois becomes a state
Description: Illinois (IL) joins the US as the 11th free state and the 21st state overall.


Title: Panic of 1819
Description: An economic recession caused in part by the Second National Bank. Though part of the corporation's job was to regulate the money issued by the 200 state banks, it instead invested in a speculative bubble caused by trading cotton and grain with Europe and westward expansion. As trade resumed with Europe as part of the end of the War of 1812, European demand for cotton and grain skyrocketed. At the same time, there was high demand for loans for purchasing Western land, causing both the National and state banks to print large amounts of money. When European demand for American goods inevitably went down, the demand for land went with it. Banks called in their loans, which debtors were unable to pay. Unemployment rose, pressuring the federal and state governments to relieve the stress. They responded by prevented banks from calling in their debts, which helped debtors but hurt creditors. The whole ordeal amplified the lack of trust the American people had in banks, something else that would help Andrew Jackson become president.


Title: University of Virginia established
Description: 


Title: <i>Dartmouth College v. Woodward</i>
Description: 


Title: Adams-Onís Treaty of 1819
Description: A US-Spain land deal in which the Spanish ceded the territory of Florida to the US, as they could not afford to keep the territory around for fear of revolution. In return, the US ceded claims to Texas (for the time being). The border between Spanish colonies and the US was clearly defined. The treaty ended when Mexico gained independence, but the border from this treaty was kept in an 1828 US-Mexico treaty titled the Treaty of Limits.


Title: Arkansas Territory organized
Description: 


Title: <i>McCulloch v. Maryland</i>
Description: A Supreme Court case determining the federal government's supreme power within its jurisdiction. The Elastic Clause of the Constitution, stating that "The Congress shall have Power ... To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof," was a source of much contention between the two parties. The clause would go on to be used as justification for many an act by the federal government, such as the creation of a National Bank. In 1819, Maryland tried to impede the Bank by taxing it. The Marshall Supreme Court struck down this tax, ruling that the Elastic Clause implied the power for the federal government to create a National Bank.


Title: SS <i>Savannah</i> embarks on its journey to be the first steamboat to cross the Atlantic
Description: 


Title: Washington Irving's "Rip Van Winkle"
Description: 


Title: First savings bank opened
Description: Bank of Savings in New York City


Title: Norwich University, the first private military school, is opened
Description: 


Title: Alabama becomes a state
Description: Alabama (AL) joins the US as the 11th slave state and the 22nd state overall.


Title: Freedmen begin sailing to Liberia
Description: 


Title: <b>Missouri Compromise</b>
Description: The Missouri Compromise was a legislative deal between the North and South to relieve sectional tensions. The area of Missouri Territory that would become the state of Missouri underwent rapid settlement in the 1810s, with thousands of Southern whites migrating with their slaves to grow hemp there (Missourian climate was not conducive to cotton, the major cash crop of most of the South).

By 1818, the area's population was reaching the threshold to petition for statehood and was expected to permit slavery. A statehood bill was introduced to Congress the next year, but was disrupted by New York Representative James Tallmadge's proposed amendment to the bill that would ban slavery in the state. The Republicans were immediately polarized by this abrupt proposal, with Northerners uniting in support of the Tallmadge Amendment and Southerners against it. The lack of party discipline during the Era of Good Feelings allowed the disunity to continue and amplify. Once united under one party, the country became torn apart over what was called the Missouri crisis.

In the 1770s and 1780s, the demand for slavery had been falling in the South. Some in the region began calling for its eventual repeal, arguing that it was antithetical to the ideals espoused in the Declaration of Independence. The idea was highly controversial, and it was widely understood that Southerners would never agree to it and would likely leave the Union if the issue was forced. Antislavery people comforted themselves in the prospect that the practice was dying out and would eventually become unpopular enough to ban. However, the invention of the cotton gin in 1793 saved the institution, and the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 allowed it to spread across the continent. The Missouri crisis united Southerners in opposition to Northern interference in Southern slavery, believing it to encourage slave revolts, which were a grave danger to white Southerners' security.

Northerners, on the other hand, were tired of the South's disproportionate amount of influence in Congress due to the 3/5 Compromise, which boosted their numbers in the House of Representatives based on the number of slaves the states had. Federalists, what few of them were left, such as Senator Rufus King of New York, had long since been opposed to the "federal ratio" of the House, and along with Tallmadge and other Northerners, they were determined to diminish the South's perceived undue influence over politics through the Tallmadge Amendment. Southern Republicans, including President James Monroe and former President Thomas Jefferson, worried that the Tallmadge Amendment was actually a ploy by former Federalists, especially King, to establish an abolitionist party in the North and impose monarchy on the country, though this concern was mostly unfounded.

Both sides used the Constitution to support their arguments. Northerners claimed that the federal government had the right to impose restrictions on territories that would carry into their statehood, pointing to the free states of Indiana and Illinois as examples. Both states kept the restriction from when they were a part of the Northwest Territory, which the Congress of the Confederation had blocked from keeping slaves in 1787. Southerners disagreed, saying that the Northwest Territory comparison was invalid because the territory was formed under a different government, not the Constitution. The current government, they argued, granted states the right to permit or abolish slavery as they saw fit, without input from the federal government. Southerners brought up the Louisiana Purchase, which granted Louisiana Territory (the old name for Missouri Territory) residents the rights of US citizens, including the protection of property (under which slaves were included). The moral side of slavery was not very heavily discussed at the time.

The House bitterly debated the bill in mid-February of 1819. Georgia Representative Thomas Cobb warned that "[i]f you persist, the Union will be dissolved. You have kindled a fire which all the waters cannot put out, which seas of blood can only distinguish." Tallmadge replied with "Let it come!" Nevertheless, despite the 3/5 Compromise, the superior raw population of the North allowed the Tallmadge Amendment to pass the House. However, the North held signficantly less sway in the Senate. According to the Constitution, every state received an equal number of senators regardless of population, which benefited the less populated South. That combined with the fact that the number of slave and free states were equal meant that the North did not have nearly as much power in the upper house. With the support of a few Northerners, the Senate rejected the Tallmadge Amendment. New York Representative John W. Taylor, who had previously ardently supported the Tallmadge Amendment, proposed another amendment that would admit Missouri as a slave state. Northerners objected, saying that a higher number of slave states, combined with the 3/5 Compromise, would put the North at a significant disadvantage politically. However, at around the same time as the Missouri crisis, the District of Maine, at the time a noncontiguous section of Massachusetts, began petitioning for statehood as a free state. The Senate connected the two proposals, passing a bill admitting Maine as a free state and allowing Missouri to form a constitution. An additional proposal, and the most important part of the Missouri Compromise, was introduced by Illinois Senator Jesse Thomas, banning slavery in the Louisiana Territory above the N 36°30' parallel (the southern boundary of Missouri), except within the limits of Missouri. The Missouri Compromise narrowly passed both the Senate and House, putting the main issue to rest for the moment.

When Missouri drafted its constitution, it permitted slavery and included an "exclusionary clause," which was a ban on free blacks and mulattoes from the state. This clause renewed debates over Missouri's admission as a state. Through the influence of Kentucky Senator Henry Clay, who would be known as "the Great Compromiser," the constitution was eventually confirmed, though with the condition that the exclusionary clause could not be used to abridge the rights and immunities of any US citizen, which is sometimes known as the Second Missouri Compromise. The compromise passed both houses and was signed by President Monroe on March 6, 1820.

Americans would later celebrate the Missouri Compromise as being as essential and respected as the Constitution. It helped to ease sectional tensions, ironically at the same time literally dividing the nation in two. Thomas Jefferson wrote:

"this momentous question, like a fire bell in the night, awakened me and filled me with terror. I considered it at once as the knell of the Union... [A]s it is, we have the wolf by the ear, and we can neither hold him, nor safely let him go. Justice is in one scale, and self-preservation in the other."

 To avoid the balance of power issue again, Congress implicitly agreed to admit one free and one slave state at around the same time to maintain balance. The Compromise was integral to statehood admissions in the coming decades, but was functionally repealed in the Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 and declared unconstitutional in the Dred Scott Decision of 1857, causing outrage among Northerners.


Title: Maine becomes a state
Description: Maine (ME) joins the US as the 12th free state and the 23rd state overall.


Title: Census of 1820
Description: This census saw the addition of Louisiana, Indiana, Mississippi, Illinois, Alabama, and Maine, the most number of states joined between censuses up to that point.

US population
9.6 million total
1.5 million slaves

State populations
1) New York 1.5 million
2) Virginia 1.1 million
3) Pennsylvania 1.0 million
4) North Carolina 639,000
5) Ohio 581,000

...

19) Alabama 144,000
20) Rhode Island 83,000
21) Mississippi 75,000
22) Delaware 73,000
23) Illinois 55,000

For the first time, New York beat Virginia in total population. It would remain the largest state until 1970, over 100 years. Ohio is also notably much larger than it was in the last census due to its high population growth. Massachusetts has gone down significantly, as Maine had become its own state.

City populations
1) New York City 124,000
2) Baltimore 78,000
3) Philadelphia 64,000
4) Boston 43,000
5) New Orleans 27,000

A city from the west was now in the top five cities by population.


Title: Robbert Gibbon Johnson publicly eats tomatoes
Description: 


Title: Election of 1820
Description: An election in which incumbent Democratic-Republican James Monroe won re-election unopposed. The election took place during the Era of Good Feelings, during which there was only one dominant political party, the Republicans. Monroe once again ran with Daniel D. Tompkins. Due to his lack of opposition, Monroe carried every state, with a near-unanimous victory. The lone dissenter was William Plumer, a faithless elector from New Hampshire, who voted for John Quincy Adams. He believed Adams to be a better president, but a legend emerged that he dissented in order to keep George Washington as the only president to be elected unanimously. Notably, one elector each from Mississippi, Pennsylvania, and Tennessee died before the election, costing those states a vote each.

Main issues: slavery
Voter Turnout: 10.1%
Significance: Third and final election in which a candidate ran unopposed
Last election of a president from the Revolutionary generation
Largest landslide victory next to Washington's
Largest post-12th Amendment landslide victory
First post-Washington election in which the Federalists did not field a candidate


Title: First American to see Antarctica
Description: 


Title: <i>Essex</i> attacked by a sperm whale
Description: this event inspired moby dick


Title: <i>Saturday Evening Post</i> begins publishing
Description: 


Title: Missouri becomes a state
Description: Missouri (MO) joins the US as the 12th free state and the 24th state overall.


Title: Florida Territory organized
Description: 


Title: <b>Monroe Doctrine</b>
Description: A US foreign policy administered by President Monroe in his annual address to Congress. He declared that:
1) The US would stay out of European affairs
2) Europe should stay out of the Western Hemisphere
3) Any move on Western countries would be seen as a threat to the US
4) The US should be the dominant power in the Western Hemisphere

Nevertheless, the declaration was not particularly intimidating to Europe, who possessed far greater militaries at the time.


Title: Federalist Party dissolved
Description: Following the Hartford Convention and the Battle of New Orleans, the Federalist Party began to lose support and power. The party fielded their last presidential candidate, Rufus King, in 1816, and officially dissolved by 1824. However, those under the name of the Federalist Party continued to influence local elections, such as controlling the MA Senate in 1830.


Title: <i>Gibbons v. Ogden</i>
Description: 


Title: Republic of LIberia founded
Description: 


Title: Election of 1824
Description: This election placed Democratic-Republican John Quincy Adams as the 6th president over his opponents, Andrew Jackson, William H. Crawford, and Henry Clay. John C. Calhoun also ran early in the election, but dropped out to successfully run for vice president. Crawford was the official Republican nominee, but it was disregarded by the other candidates. Monroe's vice president, Daniel D. Tompkins, declined to run based on his lack of popularity and health issues. When all the ballots were cast, Jackson was determined to have won a plurality of both the popular and electoral vote, but no one won a majority. Under those circumstances, it was up to the House of Representatives to decide the new president between the top three candidates. This discounted Clay, even though he would have had a strong chance of being elected in Congress if he was eligible. Before the vote, Clay was invited to Adams' house for a private meeting, raising suspicion as to what they May have discussed, especially among Jackson. After that, the House voted, determining Adams to be the winner, receiving 13 votes to Jackson's 7 and Crawford's 4. The president-elect then proceeded to appoint Clay to be Secretary of State, often considered a stepping stone for the presidency. Jackson was furious, claiming that Adams and Clay had conspired in their secret meeting to strike a "corrupt bargain" to win the presidency. He said that Clay lent his support to Adams to secure him the presidency, who would then give Clay a powerful position that he could use to attain the office later. Jackson believed he was the rightful winner of the election, as he had received more popular and electoral votes than any other candidate. He resigned his Senate seat in protest and formed his own political party, the Democrats. He would use this "corrupt bargain" theory in the 1828 election to discredit Adams and bolster his own support immensely.

Main issues: Monroe Doctrine
Voter turnout: 26.9%
Significance: First election to record the popular vote
First election in which there were four major candidates in the running
Only election in which candidates of the same party ran against each other
Only post-12th Amendment election in which no candidate received a majority of the electoral college
Victor did not receive a majority of the popular vote.


Title: National Republican Party founded
Description: Initially broken between "Adams men" and "Clay men," the supporters of John Quincy Adams and Henry Clay joined to form the anti-Jacksonian National Republican Party. They never managed to get a president elected. They were eventually subsumed into the Whig Party in 1834.


Title: Treaty of Indian Springs
Description: 


Title: J. Q. Adams Administration
Description: President: John Quincy Adams
Number: 6
Party: Democratic-Republican
Home State: Massachusetts
Vice President: John C. Calhoun
Secretary of State: Henry Clay

Previous Occupations:
Minister to the Netherlands (1794-97)
Minister to Prussia (1797-1801)
MA Senator (1803-08)
Minister to Russia (1809-14)
Minister to the UK (1815-17)
Secretary of State (1817-25)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
19th Congress: Democrat / National Republican
20th Congress: Democrat / Democrat

Chief Justice: John Marshall

Notable Qualities:
Last Democratic-Republican president
First president to share a first and last name with a previous president
President purportedly with the highest IQ


Title: Erie Canal opened
Description: The Erie Canal was opened, a 363 mile canal connecting the Hudson River to Lake Erie. It the largest canal in the US, and the second longest in the world at the time. It was faster than land transportation at the time and cut transport costs by 95%, making any business conducted near it extremely lucrative. NYC had a port connecting to it, allowing it to become economically dominant. Indeed, the canal was so useful that new cities began to spring up alongside it.


Title: Samuel Morey's internal combustion engine patented
Description: 


Title: Thomas Jefferson and John Adams die
Description: Ex-presidents Thomas Jefferson and John Adams both die within hours of each other, exactly 50 years after the signing of the Declaration of Independence. Jefferson died first at 12:50 PM, aged 83. John Adams, unaware of Jefferson's death, wrote "Thomas Jefferson survives" as his last words. Adams died at 6:20 PM, aged 90.


Title: Fredonian Rebellion
Description: 


Title: Baltimore and Ohio Railroad incorporated
Description: first US railroad to offer commercial services to people and freight


Title: Last New York slaves freed
Description: 


Title: Second American Party System
Description: The Second American Party System consisted of the Democratic Party (headed by Andrew Jackson) and the Whig Party (headed by Henry Clay, supported by John C. Calhoun and Daniel Webster). The two parties formed over a split in the Democratic-Republican Party. Andrew Jackson, enraged by the results of the 1824 election, broke off from the party and formed the Democratic Party. His opponents formed the National Republican Party as an antithesis to Jackson and soon merged with the Anti-Masons to form the Whig Party. The Whigs got their name from the British party of the same name, who supported the Parliament over the monarch. Clay called his party the Whigs because he believed Jackson acted like a (tyrannical) king during his presidency, such as by making frequent use of his veto power. The system lasted until 1854 when the Whigs broke apart due to the issue of slavery. Both parties were fairly equal in Congress, but the Whigs only got two presidents elected, both of whom died in office in their first term. People started to become more partisan during this period, as well as frequently turning up in elections, with the period seeing averages of 70-80% voter turnout starting in 1840.

Democratic Party
-5 presidents
-executive supremacy
-opposed banks, paper money, tariffs and corporations (economically conservative)
-traditional party
-pro-expansion
-universal white male suffrage
-supported agrarianism, slavery, states' rights
-supporters included farmers, people from rural areas, Westerners, urban immigrants, and Catholics: the common man

Whig Party
-4 presidents (2 elected)
-legislative supremacy
-supported banks and corporations
-modern party
-anti-expansion
-believed government should promote economic growth
-wanted tariffs on manufactured goods, education, moral reform, and road and canal construction
-supported urbanization, industrialization, federal rights
-supporters included conservative Protestants, the wealthy, businessmen, plantation owners


Title: <b>Democratic Party founded</b>
Description: 


Title: Noah Webster's <i>An American Dictionary of the English Language</i>
Description: 


Title: Tariff of Abominations
Description: 


Title: Election of 1828
Description: An election in which Tennessee Democrat Andrew Jackson defeated incumbent Massachusetts National Republican John Quincy Adams and became the 7th president. Fuming after his defeat in the 1824 election, Jackson formed his own party, the Democrats. Meanwhile, Adams, along with Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, formed the National Republican Party to counter Jackson. Despite John C. Calhoun being Adams' vice president, he decided to run under the Democratic Party with Jackson instead, leaving Adams to run with Richard Rush. Despite his victory in the previous election, Adams was hampered in 1828 by the Tariff of Abominations abhorred by the South. Jackson used this against Adams to gather overwhelming support from the region. Like many prior elections, this one was filled with insults and accusations. Adams' supporters accused Andrew and Rachel Jackson's marriage to be illegitimate, a topic the nominee was highly sensitive about, even previously dueling another man over it. Rachel Jackson, already suffering from a weak heart, died soon after the election, leading Andrew Jackson to blame the National Republicans for contributing to her death with their constant slander. Adams, a strong abolitionist, criticized Jackson for partaking in the slave trade. A notable difference between the two candidates was that Adams focused on his opinion on particular issues, while Jackson ran on his personality, history as a war hero, and opposition to Adams. Thomas Jefferson endorsed Jackson, adding to his popularity. Adams, popular in New England, swept the area, along with Maryland, New Jersey, and Delaware. Jackson carried the South and West, along with the key states of Pennsylvania and most of New York, securing his victory. Described as the Revolution of 1828, it was seen by many as an end to the aristocracy in power. Jackson came from humble origins, while Adams was the latest in a long line of elites. Because of he was a "common man," Jackson pledged to remove the property qualification for voting, ushering in an era of universal white male suffrage, an important milestone in American democracy. Jackson also used his "corrupt bargain" theory against Adams during the campaign, and when he won, it was seen as Americans starting to hold corruption in politics accountable.

Main issues: Tariffs
Voter turnout: 57.6% (record)
Significance: First election under the Second American Party System
First election in which the victor was neither from Virginia nor Massachusetts


Title: Graham crackers invented
Description: Presbyterian minister Reverend Sylvester Graham creates "Dr. Graham's Honey Biskets," later renamed to Graham crackers.


Title: Smithsonian Institution founded
Description: 


Title: Andrew Jackson's first inauguration
Description: 


Title: Jackson Administration
Description: President: Andrew Jackson
Number: 7
Party: Democrat
Home State: North/South Carolina
Vice President: John C. Calhoun (until 1832)
Martin van Buren

Previous Offices:
TN Congressman (1796-97)
Military FL Governor (1821)
TN Senator (1823-1825)

Nicknames: Old Hickory (as he was supposedly as tough as old hickory)
King Andrew (dubbed by his critics for being excessive with his veto power, something the English monarchs used to do)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
21st Congress: Democrat / Democrat
22nd Congress: Democrat / Democrat
23rd Congress: National Republican / Democrat
24th Congress: Democrat / Democrat

Chief Justice: John Marshall (1829 - 1835)
Roger B. Taney (1836 - 1837)

Notable Qualities:
First Democratic president
Only president to have the entire national debt cleared


Title: William Austin Burt's typographer
Description: 


Title: David Walker's <i>Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the World</i>
Description: 


Title: Underground Railroad
Description: 


Title: First revenue trains begin service
Description: 


Title: Indian Removal Act
Description: An act passed by Andrew Jackson that authorized the removal of Native Americans to territory west of the Mississippi River in exchange for their land in the East. Caused the Trail of Tears.


Title: Census of 1830
Description: US population
12.9 million total
2.0 million slaves

This was the first time the US population broke 10 million.

State populations
1) New York 1.9 million
2) Pennsylvania 1.3 million
3) Virginia 1.2 million
4) Ohio 938,000
5) North Carolina 738,000

...

20) Illinois 157,000
21) Missouri 140,000
22) Mississippi 137,000
23) Rhode Island 97,000
24) Delaware 77,000

Virginia has now dropped down another rank. Now three states have over 1 million people.

City populations
1) New York City 203,000
2) Baltimore 81,000
3) Philadelphia 80,000
4) Boston 61,000
5) New Orleans 46,000

New York City is noticeably far ahead of any other US city population.


Title: Tomb Thumb
Description: 


Title: <i>The Liberator</i>
Description: The first edition of the American abolitionist newspaper "The Liberator" was written by William Lloyd Garrison and published on January 1. Though the paper did not sell incredibly well, it was still known by many due to Garrison's harsh, uncompromising attitude towards slavery. He advocated for its immediate abolition, asserting that the rights enumerated in the Declaration of Independence ought to apply to any American, regardless of race. This view was quite uncommon at the time, even in the North. Many Northerners were still opposed to abolition, and the ones who weren't generally wanted gradual emancipation. Thus, Garrison was seen as a troublesome radical. However, many Southerners believed Garrison's opinion to be that of the majority of Northerners, and consequently defended slavery more valiantly as a "positive good" and passed harsher slave laws in response. The paper continued until December 29, 1865, after slavery had been abolished in the US, meaning Garrison's goal had been accomplished.


Title: First reported bank robbery
Description: 


Title: Nat Turner's Rebellion
Description: Also known as the Southampton Insurrection. Black preacher Nat Turner organized the most successful slave revolt in American history, consisting of 80 followers that attacked and killed about 60 people, most being white. The Southampton militia quelled the rebellion, and Turner was hanged. It inspired retaliation against innocent slaves in the rest of the South, which was already uncomfortable with the prospect of large-scale slave revolts.


Title: Bank War
Description: Andrew Jackson's struggle to destroy the Second National Bank, headed by Nicholas Biddle. Jackson trusted banks very little, so he vetoed the renewal of the Bank's charter and then destroyed the Bank itself by withdrawing all of the government's money from it. To fill the Bank's void, many state banks took over and began overprinting currency that caused a massive inflation, leading to the Panic of 1837.


Title: Anti-Masonic Party founded
Description: Sometime in February 1832, opponents of Andrew Jackson found the Anti-Masonic Party, the first third party in the country's history. The party feared freemasonry in the government. Masons often occupied high positions in corporations and government, and were suspected of murdering anti-Mason William Morgan. They never managed to get a president elected, but they did take the state of Vermont in 1832, as well as 20% of the popular vote. They would later be subsumed into the Whig Party, and dissolve by 1838.


Title: First Sumatran Expedition
Description: A three-day assault by the US Navy on the village of Kuala Batee in Sumatra as punishment for the massacre of the crew of the Friendship merchant vessel. The frigate Potomac successfully defeated the local forces and bombed the settlement, which deterred Sumatran attacks on US ships for six years.

Casualties:
2 Americans
~540 Sumatrans killed or wounded


Title: Black Hawk War
Description: A several-month conflict between the US and Native Americans led by Black Hawk of the Sauk tribe. The war broke out after a group of Native Americans called the "British Band" left the Iowa Indian Territory and crossed into the state of Illinois. The US believed them to be hostile and attacked, with Black Hawk and other Native forces retaliating. On August 2, the US killed or captured the remaining British Band members at the Battle of Bad Axe. Black Hawk escaped, but later surrendered and was imprisoned for one year. The war hastened the removal of Indians from American Territory.

Deaths:
77 Americans
450-600 Native Americans under Black Hawk


Title: National Bank charter veto
Description: 


Title: Nullification Crisis
Description: A sectional crisis involving South Carolina and the federal government. On July 14 1832, the Tariff of 1832 is passed as an effort to appease the South's anger over the Tariff of 1828 (Tariff of Abominations). South Carolina is still disgruntled, and on November 24, 1832, passes the Ordinance of Nullification, permitting the state to nullify any law passed by the federal government they see fit. They then threatened to secede if the government tried to collect on the taxes. On March 1, 1833, Congress passes the Force Bill (allowing President Jackson to use the military to force South Carolina to pay taxes) and the Tariff of 1833 (a further compromised tariff). The latter appeased the state, who repealed the Ordinance of Nullification on March 15.


Title: Election of 1832
Description: 


Title: Whig Party founded
Description: The Whig Party is founded by Henry Clay, along with John C. Calhoun and Daniel Webster. The party was composed of various anti-Democratic factions, such as the National Republicans and Anti-Masons. The party supported federal power, as well as the American System, which included tariffs and the National Bank. They were nationalist and industrialist, though supported federal financing of government projects. They believed expansion to be unnecessary. Finally, they believed the power of Congress ought to outweigh the power of the presidency. It was the first party to seriously rival the power of the Democratic Party.


Title: Senate rejects Roger B. Taney's appointment as Treasury Secretary
Description: 


Title: <i>Democracy in America</i>
Description: 


Title: Attempted assassination of Andrew Jackson
Description: 


Title: P.T. Barnum's first circus tour of the US
Description: 


Title: Texas Revolution
Description: A war fought between Mexico and its territory of Texas, which would become the Republic of Texas by the end of the war.

Deaths:
700 Texians
1000 Mexicans


Title: Second Seminole War
Description: A second conflict between the US and the Seminole tribe of Florida. After the passage of the Indian Removal Act in 1830, the Seminole resisted relocation, creating tension between the two groups that broke in 1835, where a band of Seminole led by Osceola ambushed two American companies marching to Fort King and killed all but three whites. The attack was known as the Dade Massacre. On the same day, Osceola led a force that killed seven outside Fort King, including General Wiley Thompson. The Seminole continued to raid US settlements around Florida in 18353 and 1836. The US Army was rather small at the time, with only 7500 soldiers, while the Seminole were experienced and frequently engaged in guerrilla warfare. In 1836, Major General Thomas Jesup was charged with ending the war. He turned it into a war of attrition, gathering a force of 9000 men and gradually wearing the Seminole down. On December 25, 1637, Colonel Zachary Taylor led a force of 800 against the Seminole's 400 in the Battle of Lake Okeechobee. The Seminole suffered few casualties, but were forced to retreat. A similar scene played out in the Battle of Loxahatchee, where sailors and soldiers led by Navy Lieutenant Levin Powell were forced to retreat after a large group of Seminole showed up. Jesup led a force of 1500 that successfully defeated the Seminole. Loxahatchee was the last major battle, with the next four years being mostly minor engagements. By 1842 a few thousand Seminole had been relocated to the Creek reservation, with only 300 Seminole left in Florida. A few hundred Seminole were allowed to stay on an informal reservation in Southern Florida (shown in the picture)

Deaths: 
1600 American troops
3000 Seminole


Title: Treaty of New Echota
Description: 


Title: National debt is paid off
Description: The entire national debt is paid off by President Andrew Jackson. This was the only time in the country's history where the federal government was completely debt-free, as they would fall back under the next year (and also suffer an economic recession). Jackson, like many things, hated debt. Before he ran for president, he was a land speculator, and hated getting into debt. Jackson started selling off US land in the West, as well as vetoing every spending bill he could. By the beginning of 1836, Jackson had not only paid all the $58 million the country owed, but even managed to get a surplus. Jackson invested the extra money in state banks (as he had already killed the National Bank), who proceeded to overprint paper currency, causing a massive devaluation of US money, causing the Panic of 1837. To help with the recession, the government started borrowing money again, plunging the country back into debt.


Title: Samuel Holt's revolver
Description: 


Title: Texas declares independence
Description: Texas declares independence from Mexico and becomes a sovereign republic.


Title: Battle of the Alamo
Description: A key conflict in the Texas Revolution, it was a 13-day siege followed by a Mexican attack on the Alamo mission. Mexican troops under President General Antonio López de Santa Anna attacked Texian troops hiding in Alamo. Santa Anna's actions were considered cruel by the Texians, who used the attack as a rallying point to successfully convince people to enlist in the army. Inspired by revenge, the Texians soon attacked and defeated the Mexicans at San Jacinto, ending the war.

Casualties:
400-600 Mexican troops killed/wounded
182-257 Texian troops killed


Title: Battle of San Jacinto
Description: An overwhelming Texan victory against Mexican forces that ended the revolution. In less than 20 minutes, the Texian Army led by General Sam Houston engaged the Mexican Army led by President General Antonio López de Santa Anna and defeated them. Santa Anna escaped, but was later captured, and signed the peace treaty ending the war and allowing Texas to become a sovereign nation.

Casualties:
650 Mexican troops killed
208 Mexican troops wounded
300 Mexican troops captured

11 Texian troops killed
40 Texian troops wounded


Title: Gag rule
Description: The gag rule over slavery was passed in Congress, known as the "Pinckney Resolutions." It banned Congressmen from reading aloud any petitions for abolition. This was in response to the hundreds of thousands of petitions they received every year for such an action. Southern politicians grew tired of these, and passed the rule championed by SC Congressman Charles Pinckney. Abolitionist Congressmen, led by ex-President John Q. Adams, who protested that the rule infringed on the freedom of petition guaranteed by the 1st Amendment. The objections to the gag rule helped catapult the Whigs into a Congressional majority. The rule was repealed on December 3, 1844.


Title: Arkansas becomes a state
Description: ArKansas (AR) joins the US as the 13th slave state and the 25th state overall.


Title: James Madison dies
Description: 


Title: Election of 1836
Description: 


Title: Michigan becomes a state
Description: Michigan (MI) joins the US as the 13th free state and the 26th state overall.


Title: John C. Calhoun's "positive good" speech
Description: 


Title: Van Buren Administration
Description: Name: Martin van Buren
Number: 8
Party: Democrat
Home State: New York
Prior Office: Vice President
Vice President: Richard M. Johnson

Previous Offices:
NY Senate member (1813-20)
NY Attorney General (1815-19)
NY Senator (1821-28)
NY Governor (1829)
Secretary of State (1829-31)
Minister to the UK (1831-32)
Vice President (1833-37)

Nicknames: Martin van Ruin (due to his association with the Panic of 1837)
Old Kinderhook (OK) (after his hometown)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
25th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
26th Congress: Democrat / Democrat

Chief Justice: Roger B. Taney

Notable Qualities:
First natural-born president
First president to have a picture taken of him while living in the White House


Title: Panic of 1837
Description: An economic crisis brought about by the rapid inflation caused by state banks. After the Bank War ended, state banks began to fill the void the National Bank left. However, there was much less regulation on these banks, and they began to overprint currency, which caused a devaluing of US money.


Title: Battle of Lake Okeechobee
Description: 


Title: Trail of Tears
Description: A forced March of 15,000 Cherokee from Georgia to Indian Territory in present-day Oklahoma. About 4,000 die from disease and starvation.


Title: First prohibition law
Description: 


Title: Charles Goodyear invents vulcanized rubber
Description: 


Title: Amistad Uprising
Description: A slave revolt on the slave ship La Amistad. 53 Mende slaves had been illegally taken from modern-day Sierra Lione and transported to Havana, Cuba (as the international slave trade had been banned by both the US and Great Britain). The slaves escaped from captivity, proceeding to kill a few members of the crew, including the captain. They demanded the navigator take them back to Africa, but were deceived and taken to Long Island, NY, where they were captured. In a Supreme Court ruling, it was determined that the slaves were captured illegally and that the rebellion was in self-defense.


Title: National Convention of Abolitionists
Description: The convention was held in Albany. Russell B. Nye's "The Slave Power Conspiracy" article cites it as possibly the first mention of the phrase "slave power." He says they resolved that "the events of the last five or six years leave no room for doubt that the SLAVE POWER is now waging a deliberate and determined war against the liberties of the free states," citing the Cincinnati Philanthropist from September 17, 1839. I could not find an archive of this paper, but I did find an invitation issued to William Lloyd Garrison to attend the convention, citing the date as the last Wednesday of July 1839 (the 31st). I cannot seem to find very much on this convention outside of this one article.


Title: Edgar Allen Poe's <i>The Fall of the House of Usher</i>
Description: 


Title: Liberty Party founded
Description: Sometime in 1840, the Liberty Party was founded, which centered primarily around abolition. It had little success in elections and died out by 1848, but was an important predecessor to the Free Soil Party later.


Title: Charles Wilke circumnavigates Antarctica
Description: 


Title: Great Natchez Tornado
Description: 


Title: Election of 1840
Description: 


Title: W. H. Harrison Administration
Description: President: William Henry Harrison
Number: 9
Party: Whig
Home State: Virginia
Vice President: John Tyler
Secretary of State: Daniel Webster

Previous Offices:
Secretary of the Northwest Territory (1798-99)
Northwest Territory Congressman (1799-1800)
Indiana Territory Governor (1801-12)
OH Congressman (1816-19)
OH Senator (1825-28)
Minister to Gran Colombia (1828-29)

Nicknames: (Old) Tippecanoe (due to his victory as a general in the Battle of Tippecanoe)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
27th Congress: Whig / Whig

Chief Justice: Roger B. Taney

Notable Qualities:
First Whig President
Shortest time served as president
First president to die in office


Title: President Harrison dies
Description: President William Henry Harrison caught a cold on March 26, which worsened with his doctors' treatments. He died on April 4, and with it created a Constitutional crisis about presidential succession. He was succeeded by John Tyler, who established the precedent that the vice president that assumed office after a president left was a president in their own right, and not merely a placeholder.


Title: Tyler Administration
Description: 


Title: Wesleyan Methodist Church schisms from the Methodist Episcopal Church
Description: 


Title: <i>Creole</i> slave revolt
Description: 


Title: John Greenough's sewing machine
Description: 


Title: Lombard Street Riot
Description: 


Title: Webster-Ashburton Treaty
Description: A US-Great Britain land border treaty. It defined the border between the two countries better, establishing Maine's modern-day border, as well as land around the Wisconsin Territory (in modern-day Minnesota).


Title: Slave revolt in the Cherokee Nation
Description: 


Title: First minstrel show opens
Description: Virginia Minstrels opens in the Bowery Amphitheatre in NYC


Title: Cathedral of Our Lady of Peace
Description: it is the oldest roman catholic cathedral still in use in the US


Title: Know-Nothing Party founded
Description: Sometime in 1844, the Native American Party, later re-named the American Party, but commonly known as the Know-Nothing Party, was founded. Its name comes from the party's initial secrecy, as any member that was asked about it was supposed to reply, "I know nothing." It was highly nativist, and was mainly focused around restricting immigration, especially of Catholics. Their main targets were Irish and German immigrants, who constituted the majority of people coming to America at the time. They ran Millard Fillmore for president in 1856, but lost. They never got a president elected, but had many seats in other positions. They dissolved by 1860.


Title: 1844 MEC General Conference causes a schism in the Methodist Church over slavery
Description: 


Title: First US telegraph line opened
Description: 


Title: Election of 1844
Description: 


Title: Irish Potato Famine
Description: A period of great famine in Ireland brought about by a potato blight. The Irish grew almost exclusively potatoes, so when the blight hit, the people were left with very little food. An intense famine set in, with one million dying over the course of four years. A large number of Irish also emigrated in order to escape the famine, with many arriving in the US, around five million by the end of the decade. Though America was known as the land of golden opportunity for immigrants seeking a better life, Irish immigrants tended to face strong discrimination upon arrival. Most Irish immigrants were poor, Catholic, and spoke little English, none of which pleased American nativists. They were usually unable to apply for high-paying jobs due to hiring discrimination, such as the famous phrases "Irish need not apply" or "No Irish need apply." As such, they were usually stuck in working-class jobs, such as railroad construction. After the famine was over, immigration for Ireland fell, as did nativist sentiment.


Title: Rules of baseball codified
Description: 


Title: US authorized to annex Texas
Description: 


Title: Florida becomes a state
Description: Florida (FL) joins the US as the 14th slave state and the 27th state overall.


Title: Polk Administration
Description: President: James Knox Polk
Number: 11
Party: Democrat
Home State: North Carolina
Vice President: George M. Dallas

Previous Offices:
TN Congressman (1833-39)
Chair of the House Ways and Means Committee (1833-35)
Speaker of the House (1835-39)
TN Governor (1839-41)

Nicknames: The Manifest Destiny President

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
29th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
30th Congress: Democrat / Whig

Chief Justice: Roger B. Taney

Notable Qualities:
First president to be elected at younger than age 50
Expanded the country's size under his administration than any other president


Title: North-South schism in the Baptist Church over slavery
Description: 


Title: Polk advocates for manifest destiny
Description: 


Title: Manifest Destiny
Description: The first mention of manifest destiny, the widely-held American belief that the country was destined to spread their "empire of liberty" from one side of the continent to the other. The phrase was mentioned in John O'Sullivan's newspaper "The New York Morning News." This ideology was accepted by many an American and served as a primary reason for westward expansion.


Title: Texas becomes a state
Description: Texas (TX) joins the US as the 15th slave state and the 28th state overall.


Title: Mexican War
Description: A war fought between the US and Mexico. There is some disputed territory in Texas, and both countries lay claim to it. The US sends troops into the territory, which may or may not be for defensive purposes, and also may or may not have marched into Mexican territory as well. In any case, US troops are shot and Polk gets Congress to declare war. The Americans wins, even managing to capture Mexico City. It is the eighth deadliest war in American history. It is also one of 5 wars in which Congress officially declares it so.

Deaths:
13,000 Americans
25,000 Mexicans


Title: Bear Flag Revolt
Description: A revolt by a group of American settlers that rebelled against Mexico and declared California to be an independent republic.

Mexico feared the growing number of American settlers in California were not interested in becoming Mexican citizens and wanted the US to annex the area. On the eve of the Mexican-American War, the settlers feared the Mexicans would preemptively strike them to avoid rebellion. US Army officer John C. Fremont (later a politician) encouraged the locals to create a militia, which on June 14 captured Sonoma, a Mexican outpost near San Francisco. They arrested retired Mexican General Mariano Vallejo and his family, though he was in favor of US annexation of California.

The rebels created a flag featuring a California grizzly bear and declared California to be an independent republic, including a star as reference to the "Lone Star Republic" of Texas, which was its own country after seceding from Mexico. In July, the rebels learned that the US, who had declared war on Mexico, had successfully invaded California. As the US was accomplishing what the rebels wanted, the Bear Republic dissolved on July 9.

The flag the rebels made was officially adopted as the California flag in 1911.


Title: Oregon Treaty
Description: A treaty between the US and British Canada that set the border between the two countries at the 49th parallel. Previously, the Oregon Country was composed of territories from modern-day Oregon, Washington, Idaho, and parts of Wyoming, Montana, and British Canada, and was jointly occupied between the US and Great Britain. The treaty granted Great Britain the land above the 49th parallel, while the US acquires the land below it. However, Polk's supporters were less than pleased with this arrangement, as the president had previously promised the country all of the territory south of the 54°40' parallel. This dispute gave rise to the slogan "54°40' or fight!" However, the agreement was not changed and the land above the 49° was ceded to the British.


Title: First modern baseball game
Description: 


Title: Wilmot Proviso
Description: A bill drafted by Democratic Senator David Wilmot of Pennsylvania. To appeal to his abolitionist vote base, Wilmot proposed that if any territory is gained through the Mexican-American War, slavery ought to be abolished there. It passed in the North-dominated House, but died in the Senate where the South had more power.


Title: Elias Howe's sewing machine patented
Description: 


Title: Iowa becomes a state
Description: Iowa (IO) joins the US as the 14th free state and the 29th state overall.


Title: Battle of Buena Vista
Description: 


Title: Virginia reclaims its portion of the District of Columbia
Description: 


Title: American Medical Association founded
Description: 


Title: Cumberland School of Law
Description: 


Title: Cayuse War
Description: A conflict between the US and Cayuse tribe in the Northwest Territory. It started because of the Whitman Massacre on November 29, 1847, where a misunderstanding between the two sides lead to the Cayuse attacking the Whitman Mission at present-day Walla Walla, WA, killing 14. The Oregon governor organized a militia of 50 known as the Oregon Rifles, who participated in minor skirmishes with the Cayuse. In January 1848, 500 militiamen were organized and continued to fight both friendly and hostile Cayuse. In 1850 the tribe surrendered 5 Native Americans the US suspected in the participation in the Whitman Massacre. Though one pledged innocence, all 5 were found guilty and hanged on June 3, 1850. Conflict continued until 1855, when the Cayuse were defeated.


Title: Free Soil Party founded
Description: Sometime in 1848, the Free Soil Party is founded. Its ideology was based mostly around abolitionism, specifically the advocation against the expansion of slavery into the new territory gained in the Mexican Cession. Former Democratic president Martin van Buren ran under the party in 1848, but lost to Whig Zachary Taylor. They never managed to get a president elected but had several men in Congress. They dissolved after 1852.


Title: Gold discovered at Sutter's Mill, CA
Description: The gold discovered at Sutter's Mill by James Wilson Marshall sparked a nationwide fever for gold that brought hundreds of thousands of migrants from the East to California, as well as immigrants from other countries. This discovery marked the beginning of the Gold Rush.


Title: Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
Description: The US-Mexico treaty ending the Mexican-American War. The US receives California, Nevada, Utah, most of Arizona, and some of Colorado, Wyoming, and New Mexico. The US grants the nation $15 million in return. Some Americans want to annex all of Mexico, but others argue that Catholic browns have no place in the US, so most of Mexico is allowed to be independent.


Title: Wisconsin becomes a state
Description: Wisconsin (WI) joins the US as the 15th free state and the 30th state overall.


Title: Seneca Falls Convention
Description: The first women's rights convention, held at Seneca Falls, NY. Wrote the Declaration of Sentiments, a parody of the Declaration of Independence that lists women's grievances against men. Many famous feminists attend, such as Susan B. Anthony or Lucretia Mott.


Title: Election of 1848
Description: 


Title: Henry David Thoreau's <i>Civil Disobedience</i>
Description: 


Title: Elizabeth Blackwell receives the first medical degree awarded to a woman
Description: 


Title: Transcontinental steamboat service opens
Description: 


Title: Taylor Administration
Description: President: Zachary Taylor
Number: 12
Party: Whig
Home State: Virginia
Vice President: Millard Fillmore

Prior Occupation: Major General of the 1st Infantry Regiment United States Army (No prior elected office)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
31st Congress: Democrat / Democrat

Chief Justice: Roger B. Taney

Notable Qualities:
Died in office
First president not to have been elected to a prior political office


Title: Delaware Wedge discovered
Description: 


Title: John C. Calhoun dies
Description: 


Title: President Taylor dies
Description: President Zachary Taylor reportedly perished from a stomach-related illness at 65 years old. His doctor diagnosed the illness as cholera. Though rumors circulated about a poisoning committed by Southerners, it was later debunked. He was succeeded by Millard Fillmore.


Title: California becomes a state
Description: California (CA) joins the US as the 16th free state and the 31st state overall. At this point, the balance between free and slave states becomes permanently upset, as no slave counterpart to California was ever admitted. This left the Union with more free than slave states, removing Southern power in the Senate.


Title: Compromise of 1850
Description: The Compromise of 1850 was a bundle of legislations authored by Senators Henry Clay (W-KY) and Stephen Douglas (D-IL) and passed by Congress in order to appease the conflicts between North and South over the issue of slavery. Proposed on January 29 and approved on May 9, it consisted of the following:

1) California would be admitted to the Union as a free state with no slave counterpart. In 1848, Mexico ceded a large section of their northern territory for losing the war with the US. President Zachary Taylor desired immediate statehood for California and New Mexico, as he hoped to pass the slavery question onto them instead of Congress having to deal with it. The former had a sizable population due to the California Gold Rush of 1849, enough to warrant becoming a state. Because California was not suitable for crops that relied on slave labor to be profitable, there was little enthusiasm for slavery in the territory, making it logical to admit it as a free state. Normally, a slave state counterpart would be admitted to keep the balance of power in the Senate, but no other US territory had enough people to warrant creating one. Instead, Congress considered splitting California in two along the Missouri Compromise line, naming the northern part California and the southern part Colorado. The Californians didn't want to be divided, though, so their final solution was to promise to send one pro-slavery senator and one anti-slavery senator to Washington, DC at all times in order to preserve the balance. This was difficult for California to uphold, however, because of the aforementioned lack of enthusiasm for slavery there.

2) The slave trade (not slavery) was abolished in Washington, DC. It was seen as a bad reflection on American character when the slave trade was legal in the federal capital of the land of the free. However, because it was still in the South, the practice of slavery itself was allowed to persist. Southerners still viewed it as a concession to the North and strongly opposed it, but were unable to block the legislation from passing.

3) Texas would drop some of its land claims (setting its present-day borders) in exchange for $10 million to pay off the debt it had accumulated during its war with Mexico. Texas' land claims were quickly becoming an issue for the US. Some of the state's claims were above the Missouri Compromise line, which should be free of slavery, yet Texas was a slave state and therefore all of its land should be open to the practice. Texas also claimed a much larger area of land than they were actually able to control. Included in this claim was much of modern-day New Mexico, who had been at odds with Texas since the 1841 Santa Fe Expedition. New Mexico was opposed to slavery, while Texas was strongly in favor of it. Austin, the Texan capital, lay hundreds of miles away from Santa Fe, the prominent city in New Mexico, and so the New Mexicans felt that they were distinctly separate from their eastern neighbor. The debate on the Senate floor was so heated, at one point Mississippian Henry S. Foote drew a pistol on Missourian Thomas Hart Benton. Though many Southerners strongly advocated against the Texan cession, as they wanted as much land to be open to slavery as possible, President Millard Fillmore shut them down, proclaiming that the US had promised to protect New Mexico in the 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Fearing defeat, Texas' senators accepted Stephen Douglas' compromise, in which the state gave up its claims north of the Missouri Compromise line, as well as land west of the 103rd meridian and north of the 32nd parallel in exchange for its war debt being paid off by Congress.

4) The Utah and Mexico Territories (larger than the modern-day states) would be allowed to determine the legality of slavery within their borders through popular sovereignty. There was debate over whether or not to allow slavery in these territories. On the one hand, they were geographically southern and were below the Missouri Compromise line, which indicated future slave states. However, like California the area was not good for anything that slavery was profitable for (like growing cotton), and anyway the Missouri Compromise line did not actually extend that far west. Stephen Douglas, a Democratic senator from Illinois, was a strong proponent of popular sovereignty, or the ability for the people to govern themselves. He proposed that the residents of the territory vote on the legality of slavery once there were enough of them. However, the territories reMained sparsely populated for several decades, and only Nevada would be admitted to the Union as a (free) state before the abolition of slavery at the federal level.

5) The passage of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, an upgraded form of the one from 1793. The most hated part of the Compromise of 1850 by the North, it required citizens and officials of Northern states to return escaped slaves to their masters in the South. The original act had been weakened by the Prigg v. Pennsylvania Supreme Court decision, which ruled that states did not have to help in hunting down fugitive slaves. The 1850 law strengthened the original by imposing a fine on those harboring fugitive slaves and requiring officials to return slaves to any Southerner who claims ownership over them. The North instantly refused to comply with the law once it was passed. Wisconsin attempted to nullify the law, but was overruled by the Supreme Court, convincing Northerners that the judicial branch had been taken control of by "slave powers." Vermont passed a law requiring officials to help fugitive slaves, causing uproar among pro-slavery Americans. Virginia governor John B. Floyd warned that the law May convince the South to secede, and President Fillmore threatened to send the military into Vermont to force compliance with the act. It inspired Harriet Beecher Stowe to write the famous abolitionist novel Uncle Tom's Cabin, and galvanized many Northerners previously indifferent towards slavery to take action by smuggling slaves into Canada through the Underground Railroad.

These were originally passed as an omnibus bill, proposed by Clay, but was unable to pass the Senate. At this point, Clay was feeling too ill to continue, leaving Douglas to take over the debate. Douglas split the bill into individual bills, all of which passed. Taylor was opposed to the compromise, but was replaced by Vice President Millard Fillmore upon his death. Fillmore supported the compromise, and signed all of the bills into law. The Compromise of 1850 sharply divided the country along sectional lines. It was opposed by Northerners that felt too many concessions were made to the pro-slavery movement, and feared that the institution could now expand into the Southwest. They especially hated the Fugitive Slave Act, feeling that they were now being forced to partake in something morally rephrensible. Northern Opposition included most Northern Whigs, who were led by William Seward, who delivered a famous speech to the Senate, in which he proclaimed that slavery was prohibited by “a higher law than the Constitution.” The compromise was also opposed to pro-slavers led by John C. Calhoun, who strongly opposed the creation of new free states. However, calls for disunion by the South did cease, at least for the moment. Despite the opposition from radicals, moderates hailed it as the ultimate compromise. One such moderate was President Fillmore, who signed all of the bills over the course of a few days. It was the last action between the Great Triumvirate, often considered the three greatest senators of their time. Calhoun would die later that year, while Clay and Webster passed away two years later. Initially, it seemed a victory for compromise, ensuring stability for a few more years. Fillmore proclaimed the compromise as a "final settlement" of the issues that had been plaguing the problem for decades. However, it would soon prove not to be enough to satisfy the sectional tensions in the nation. It is estimated that the compromise delayed the Civil War by about 10 years, during which time the North industrialized to unprecendented levels, ensuring their victory over the South in the 1860s.


Title: <i>America</i> wins the first America's Cup yacht race
Description: 


Title: Uncle Tom's Cabin
Description: The book Uncle Tom's Cabin was published, an antislavery novel based on the real world experiences of slaves. It was written by Harriet Beecher Stowe, and was one of the leading causes of the Civil War.


Title: Henry Clay dies
Description: 


Title: "What, to the Slave, is the Fourth of July?" speech
Description: 


Title: Daniel Webster dies
Description: 


Title: Election of 1852
Description: 


Title: Pierce Administration
Description: President: Franklin Pierce
Number: 14
Party: Democrat
Home State: New Hampshire
Vice President: William R. King (until 1853)
Nickname: Handsome Frank

Prior Offices:
NH Congressman (1833-37)
NH Senator (1837-42)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
33rd Congress: Democrat / Democrat
34th Congress: Democrat / Opposition

Chief Justice: Roger B. Taney

Notable Qualities:


Title: Republican Party founded
Description: Starting as just one of the many third parties vying to fill the void the Whig Party left, the Republican Party soon gathered members of other failed parties like the Free Soil Party, as well as former Whigs. At the time of their foundation, they were focused mainly on abolition, but unlike other parties possessed a comprehensive set of policies for taking office as well. Founded by Hannibal Hamlin (future vice president under Lincoln), they first ran John C. Fremont for president in 1856 and lost, followed by Abraham Lincoln in 1860, who found the first presidential victory for the party. As of 2018, there have been more Republican presidents (19) than any other party (followed by Democrats at 15).


Title: Treaty of Kanagawa
Description: In the 1850s, Commodore Matthew C. Perry was sent to Japan by President Fillmore with some gunships to "negotiate" a trade treaty with the emperor (even though it was the shogun that actually had the power). Before this, Japan had been almost completely isolationist, allowing only a few Dutch and Chinese ships to trade with them. Japan sends a letter back, saying that they agree, but they need five years to prepare a harbor. Commodore Perry comes back with even more gunships and threatens to go to war with Japan if they don't agree right away, and to show he means business he opens fire on some nearby buildings. Japan grudgingly agrees, and in 1854 the two countries sign the Treaty of Kanagawa, which opens two Japanese trading ports to American sailors.


Title: Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854
Description: An act passed by Congress granting the territories of Kansas and Nebraska the ability to decide the legality of slavery through popular sovereignty. In 1854, Democratic Senator Stephen Douglas wanted to build a transcontinental railroad that terminated in his state of Illinois. To do that, the railroad had to pass through either Kansas or Nebraska, and to do that he wanted them to achieve statehood. The question of slavery soon arose, and to combat it Douglas suggested the idea of popular sovereignty be used. The new states' residents would vote to permit or abolish slavery, much like in the Utah and New Mexico territories were allowed to as per the Compromise of 1850. This again contradicted the 36°30' line created by the Missouri Compromise, which prohibited slavery above said parallel, which both Kansas and Nebraska were. However, Douglas, like many Congressmen, assumed the Southern state of Kansas would move to allow slavery, whereas the Northern state of Nebraska would abolish it, allowing the balance of power in the Senate to be maintained. Though he was right about Nebraska, an unexpectedly powerful abolitionist movement in Kansas would lead to the events in Bleeding Kansas.


Title: Gadsden Purchase
Description: A land deal between the US and Mexico, instigated by the US desire to build a transcontinental railroad terminating in what is now the southeastern US. The deal consisted of Mexico selling 29,760 square miles of land in southern Arizona and New Mexico in return for $10 million. With this treaty, the US gained all the land to form modern-day contiguous United States.


Title: Knights of the Golden Circle founded
Description: 


Title: Walt Whitman's <i>Leaves of Grass</i>
Description: 


Title: William S. Harney attacks a Sioux village
Description: 


Title: Rogue River Wars
Description: A conflict between the US and Rogue River Indians in modern-day southern Oregon. Caused by skirmishes between Native Americans and white settlers infringing on their territory, it climaxed at the Battle of Hungry Hill, where Americans fired at the natives from across a ravine, killing 16 and losing 11 themselves.

Deaths:
194 Americans
~250 Natives


Title: Third Seminole War
Description: A third conflict between the US Army and the Seminole tribe in Florida.

On December 20 1855, a group of Seminoles led by Billy Bowlegs attacked a small group of US soldiers led by Lieutenant George Hartstuff, killing several. The Seminoles conducted several raids throughout January 1856. On March 31, they tried attacking Dr. Joseph Braden's plantation, referred to as the "Braden Castle." They captured a few slaves and mules, but the extra weight slowed them down, allowing the US militia to catch up to them and kill two Seminoles. Several small attacks commenced during spring, usually not resulting in any more than a few deaths. On June 16, 20 militiamen attacked some Seminole at the Peace River, killing somewhere between 4 and 20, including Ocsen Tustenuggee, the only Seminole chief waging attacks against US settlements.

In September, US Brigadier General William S. Tarney assumed control of the military in Florida. He planned to pin them down in a swamp, but to no avail. Colonel Gustavus Loomis replaced Harney, and pursued the Seminole across the swamp with specially designed boats. In November 1857, 800 US troops destroyed any Seminole village they found and captured over a dozen Seminole. They attacked again in January 1858, destroying more Seminole towns. Billy Bowlegs was contacted and asked to move to a separate reservation set aside for them in exchange for $100 or more for each Seminole. Over 100 Seminole, including Bowlegs, agreed and move by early May. The US declared the war to be over by May 8.

The Seminole presence in Florida was greatly diminished, leaving only 100-200 by 1858, with even more moving out in the coming years. The troops were withdrawn, as were the militia, and the forts were decommissioned.


Title: Caning of Charles Sumner
Description: Senator Preston Brooks (D-SC) attacks abolitionist Senator Charles Sumner (R-MA) with a gold-tipped walking cane. This was in response to Sumner's recent speech that strongly condemned slaveholders, including a relative of Brooks. Brooks nearly beat him to death, not stopping even when his cane snapped in two. Several senators tried to intervene, but others still held them back. Eventually, the two were broken up and Sumner was sent to the hospital, while Brooks was arrested and fined the equivalent of $8000. This attack sharply polarized the nation, with Southerners celebrating Brooks as a hero and the North recognizing Sumner as a martyr of sorts.


Title: Guano Islands Act
Description: An act passed by Congress granting the US authority to annex any unclaimed islands discovered to contain guano. This qualification existed because guano is a potent fertilizer, as well as being a source of saltpeter, an ingredient of gunpowder. While the US had claimed upwards of 200 islands from this act, it has since withdrawn all of those claims save ten. These islands include Baker Island, Howler Island, Jarvis Island, Midway Atoll, Johnston Atoll, Navassa Island, and Kingman Reef. They are part of a group of US islands known as the US Minor Outlying Islands. Only Midway Atoll is inhabited today, with just 40 residents.


Title: First US consul to Japan arrives
Description: 


Title: Election of 1856
Description: 


Title: Third American Party System
Description: Devised mainly around the issue of slavery, the Third American Party System featured the Democratic and Republican Parties. In this period of time, Democrats were the primary party in the South and supported conservative policies like low tariffs or resistance to reforms. The Republicans were composed of former Whigs, Free Soilers, and other failed parties. They were the liberal party, backing social reforms like black rights. They were nationalist and expansionist, as well. They adopted much of the Whig ideology. People were even more loyal to their parties, with voter turnout remaining at around 70-80% each election. After the Civil War, both parties were controlled by businessmen until the 1890s.

Democratic Party
-Party of the South, but still had support from farmers, workers, and Catholic immigrants
-economically conservative, including low tariffs
-opposed reforms like Prohibition
-supported states' rights, slavery, and racial discrimination

Republican Party
-founded by former Whigs, Free-Soilers, and some former Northern anti-slavery Democrats
-supported by businessmen, the middle class, and blacks
-strongest in the North and West
-similar to the Whigs in that they supported urbanization and industrialization, as well as education
-nationalist
-supported moral reforms like Prohibition


Title: Buchanan Administration
Description: President: James Buchanan Jr.
Number: 15
Party: Democratic
Home State: Pennsylvania
Vice President: John C. Breckenridge
Nickname: The Old Public Functionary

Prior Offices:
PA State Congressman (1814-16)
PA Congressman (1821-31)
Chair of the House Judiciary Committee (1829-31)
Minister to Russia (1832-33)
PA Senator (1834-45)
Secretary of State (1845-49)
Minister to the UK (1853-56)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
35th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
36th Congress: Democrat / Republican

Chief Justice: Roger B. Taney

Notable Qualities:
Possibly the first gay president


Title: <i>Dred Scott v. Sandford</i>
Description: The Dred Scott Decision was the verdict laid down by the Taney Supreme Court in the case Dred Scott v. Sandford. Dred Scott was a slave who had been taken by his masters from the slave state of Missouri to Illinois, which was designated free under the Missouri Compromise. When he was taken back to Missouri to be a slave, Scott sued, claiming that his presence in free territory automatically emancipated him. After losing in both Missouri state court and US federal court, he appealed to the Supreme Court. They ruled 7-2 against Scott, with Chief Justice Roger B. Taney writing that blacks were never intended to be considered US citizens, and therefore were entitled to none of the associated rights and privileges. One of these rights was the ability to sue, and so Scott would automatically lose any federal lawsuit he was involved in due to not meeting the "diversity of citizenship" required by Article III of the Constitution. Taney based his conclusion off of various historical precedents. Despite concluding that the Supreme Court had no jurisdiction in the case due to Scott's lack of citizenship, he continued further. He wrote that the Missouri Compromise, which banned slavery in territories north of the 36° 30' parallel, was unconstitutional, as it deprived slave owners of their right to property (which included slaves) without due process, which is required by the 5th Amendment. Associate Justices Curtis and McLean dissented, the former writing that Taney's historical precedents of blacks being denied citizenship were faulty, and the latter decrying Taney's decision to strike down the Missouri Compromise despite rendering the case invalid. President-elect James Buchanan was discovered to have interfered in the decision, pursuading Northern Associate Justice Robert Cooper Grier to vote with the Southerners to avoid the decision appearing split along sectional lines. Republicans speculated that Taney had informed Buchanan of the decision before his inaugural address, in which he proclaimed the slavery problem would be solved under his administration. Buchanan's interference in the decision was regarded as highly improper. Both Buchanan and Taney hoped the decision would put an end to the slavery debate. Instead, it only served to cause more bitterness and distress. The decision was celebrated in the South as the correct interpretation of the Constitution, with Senator and future President of the Confederacy Jefferson Davis being among its key proponents. Taney had accomplished the long-awaited goal of Democrats to totally repeal the Missouri Compromise. Northerners beame convinced that the Supreme Court had been taken over by the "slave power," and became more opposed to slavery than ever. They feared that Taney was just one step away from declaring free states unconstitutional. With this in mind, the Republican Party gained significant backing, helping it win the 1860 presidential election. Fear over whether or not the entire West would become a battleground like Kansas paralyzed the markets. Several key railroads failed, followed by the collapse of several banks, triggering the Panic of 1857 in the North. Today, the Dred Scott Decision is widely regarded as among the worst the Supreme Court has ever made.


Title: Elisha Otis installs the first elevator
Description: 


Title: Panic of 1857
Description: 


Title: Minnesota becomes a state
Description: Minnesota (MN) joins the US as the 17th free state and the 32nd state overall.


Title: Abraham Lincoln's "House Divided" speech
Description: 


Title: Harris Treaty
Description: 


Title: Oregon becomes a state
Description: Oregon (OR) joins the US as the 18th free state and the 33rd state overall.


Title: John Brown's raid on Harper's Ferry
Description: A 3-day assault from the Bleeding Kansas attacks perpetrated by (probably crazy) abolitionist John Brown to incite a nationwide slave revolt. His party of 22 attacked a US arsenal at Harper's Ferry, VA, but was soon defeated by some Marines. He was seen as a martyr for the North, as he was radical but also antislavery.

Casualties:
1 Marine
10 assailants
6 civilians


Title: Pig War
Description: 


Title: First Cortina War
Description: A conflict in Brownsville, TX between Cortinistas led by Mexican rancher and military leader (not associated with and considered an outlaw by the Mexican government) Juan N. Cortina and several groups in the US, including the US military, Texas Rangers, and a local resistance group called the Brownsville Tigers. It started when Cortina shot Brownsville marshal Robert Shears. By late September, Cortina had captured the town of Brownsville. The Brownsville Tigers allied with a group of Texas Rangers and some US troops and defeat Cortina by March 1860. Cortina would later cause further trouble in the Second Cortina War in 1861, where Cortina would lose an additional 18 men in an unsuccessful attack on Zapata County, TX against Confederate forces.

Casualties:
31 Americans killed or wounded
198 Cortinistas (+18 from the Second Cortina War)


Title: Drilling finishes on the first productive oil well in Titusville, PA
Description: 


Title: Joshua Norton declares himself emperor
Description: 


Title: Pony Express
Description: 


Title: Prince of Wales visits the US
Description: 


Title: Election of 1860
Description: A landmark presidential election placing Republican Abraham Lincoln as the 16th president over Northern Democrat Stephen A. Douglas, Southern Democrat John C. Breckenridge, and Constitutional Unionist John Bell. Notably, Lincoln appeared to have won exactly zero votes in the South due to most Southern states refusing to even place Lincoln's name on the ballot. This election was the final straw for the South, who saw Lincoln as a radical that would abolish slavery. Less than two months after the election, the South began to secede from the Union.


Title: Crittenden Compromise
Description: A failed proposal that attempted to forestall the secession of the South by placating them on the issue of slavery. Proposed by Constitutional Unionist KY Senator John J. Crittenden, it proposed a series of Congressional legislation and six constitutional amendments that guaranteed the existence of slavery where it was already legal. It also suggested the re-institution of the Missouri Compromise line that would be unrepealable, and then be extended to California. It appealed to Democrats, but was rejected by Republicans, especially Abraham Lincoln, unwilling to accept such major concessions to the South and to slavery.


Title: Southern Secession
Description: The South began to secede from the Union to form the Confederate States of America (CSA). The order of states seceding are as follows:
1) South Carolina (December 20, 1860)
2) Mississippi (January 9, 1861)
3) Florida (January 10, 1861)
4) Alabama (January 11, 1861)
5) Georgia (January 19, 1861)
6) Louisiana (January 26, 1861)
7) Texas (February 1, 1861)

-------------------Battle of Fort Sumter---------------------

8) Virginia (April 17, 1861)
9) Arkansas (May 6, 1861)
10) Tennessee (May 7, 1861)
11) North Carolina (May 20, 1861)

The first seven secessions were before Lincoln even arrived in office.


Title: Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's <i>Paul Revere's Ride</i>
Description: 


Title: Kansas becomes a state
Description: Kansas (KS) joins the US as the 19th free state and the 34th state overall.


Title: <i>Trent</i> Affair
Description: 


Title: Confederate States of America formed
Description: 


Title: Lincoln Administration
Description: President: Abraham Lincoln
Number: 16
Party: Republican
Home State: Kentucky
Vice Presidents: Hannibal Hamlin (until March 1865)
Andrew Johnson
Secretary of State: William H. Seward
Secretary of the Treasury: Salmon P. Chase
Nicknames: Honest Abe

Prior Offices:
IL State Congressman (1834-42)
IL Congressman (1847-49)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
37th Congress: Republican / Republican
38th Congress: Republican / Republican
39th Congress: Republican / Republican

Chief Justice: Roger B. Taney (1861 - 1864)
Salmon P. Chase

Notable Qualities:
First Republican president
First president to be assassinated
Tallest president
Only president to be in office during a civil war


Title: Battle of Fort Sumter
Description: The first battle of the Civil War, consisting of Confederate soldiers bombarding For Sumter near Charleston, SC. After Confederate Brigadier General P. G. T. Beauregard had sufficiently bombed the fort, Union Major Robert Anderson evacuated the fort, which was then captured by the Confederacy.


Title: US Civil War
Description: 


Title: First Battle of Bull Run
Description: Known as the First Battle of Manassas by the South, it was a decisive victory for the CSA over the Union. Pressured by civilians calling for an early end to the war, Union Brigadier General Irvin McDowell Marched his inexperienced army to meet Confederate General Beauregard's equally inexperienced troops. After an initial Confederate disadvantage due to McDowell's (poorly executed) surprise attack, General Thomas J. Jackson stood firm at the battle line, earning him the nickname "Stonewall." The Confederates launched a counterattack, resulting in Union defeat.


Title: Crittenden-Johnson Resolution
Description: 


Title: George McClellan assumes control of the Union Army of the Potomac
Description: 


Title: Leonidas Polk invades Kentucky
Description: 


Title: Battle of Santa Rosa Island
Description: 


Title: First transcontinental telegraph line completed
Description: 


Title: Winfield Scott resigns as Commander of the Union Army
Description: 


Title: David Hunter replaces John C. Fremont as Western Department Union General
Description: 


Title: Battle of Belmont
Description: 


Title: USS <i>Monitor</i> launched
Description: 


Title: Union capture of Fort Henry
Description: 


Title: Union forbids soldiers from returning fugitive slaves
Description: 


Title: Union occupation of Baton Rouge
Description: 


Title: Homestead Act of 1862
Description: The first of the Homestead Acts, it granted 160 acres of land to any adult citizen (including freed slaves after the passage of the 14th Amendment) who had not taken up arms against the US government (including women), provided that they live on the land for at least 5 years and improve it. it took effect on January 1, 1863.


Title: The US and UK agree to suppress the slave trade
Description: 


Title: Pacific Railway Act of 1862
Description: A federal act granting large tracts of land to Union Pacific Railroad and Central Pacific Railroad to construct a transcontinental railroad from the eastern Missouri River to the Sacramento River. The Southern Pacific railroad was originally intended to be the first transcontinental railroad, connecting California to Texas, but the project was suspended after the latter state seceded from the Union. The companies were lacking in laborers to construct the railroad, so they employed large numbers of Chinese immigrants, who could be paid very little and who would often work on the most arduous and dangerous activities. The project would be finished in 1869.


Title: Battle of Cedar Mountain
Description: 


Title: Dakota War of 1862
Description: Also known as Little Crow's War, it was a conflict between the US and the Sioux, which started when the latter launched a series of attacks against white settlers. The US retaliated by capturing nearly a thousand Sioux by December. Eventually, the Sioux surrendered and 38 men were sentenced to hang on the same day, making it the largest single-day execution in American history.

Deaths:
77 American soldiers
450-800 American civilians
150 Sioux + 40 executed


Title: Second Battle of Bull Run
Description: A decisive victory for the Confederate over the Union at Prince William County, VA. While Lee's army was heading to Maryland, Stonewall Jackson captured a supply depot at Manassas, which was important to the Union's communication line with the capital. On August 28, he attempted an attack on Major General John Pope's column, but to no avail. The next day, Pope was confident he had Jackson surrounded, convincing him to launch a repulsed attack that took many lives on both sides. He tried the same thing the next day on August 30, but the attack was foiled by a combined attack by the Confederacy. General James Longstreet charged his 25,000 men at Union Major General Fitz John Porter's line while the Union were being bombarded with artillery shells. It being the biggest simultaneous mass assault of the war, it delivered a crushing blow to the Union Army. Pope was fired, and Porter was court-martialed. It was a key victory for the Confederacy.

Casualties:
1716 Union troops killed
8215 Union troops wounded

1305 Confederate troops killed
7048 Confederate troops wounded


Title: Battle of Chantilly
Description: 


Title: George McClellan restored to full command
Description: 


Title: Battle of Antietam
Description: 


Title: Battle of Perryville
Description: 


Title: Ambrose Burnside assumes control of the Union Army of the Potomac
Description: 


Title: Battle of Cane Hill
Description: 


Title: West Virginia formally recognized as a separate state
Description: 


Title: Emancipation Proclamation
Description: An executive order issued on January 1 by Abraham Lincoln. It declared the emancipation of all slaves in the Confederate states. It did not immediately free any slaves, as the Union had little control over the Confederacy and it did not emancipate any slaves in the border states (slave states loyal to the Union), but nevertheless was a great cause for celebration for the abolitionist movement. It changed the reason for the Civil War to be about slavery, inspiring many more to join the cause. It gave slaves further incentive to run away, knowing that they could find freedom in the North (as opposed to earlier in history, where the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 would have required Northerners to return them to the South).


Title: Grierson's Raid
Description: 


Title: Battle of Chancellorsville
Description: April 30 - May 6


Title: 54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry deployed
Description: 


Title: Morgan's Raid
Description: 


Title: Second Battle of Winchester
Description: 


Title: West Virginia becomes a state
Description: West Virginia (WV) joins the US as the 16th slave state and the 35th state overall. They join the Union already with a plan of gradual emancipation, and 8 months later completely abolish slavery, becoming the 20th free state. They are the last slave state to join the US.


Title: Battle of Gettysburg
Description: The bloodiest battle of the Civil War. Robert E. Lee led an attack on the North to pressure them into giving up. Union Major General George Meade met him at Gettysburg and the fight lasted three days, starting on July 1. On the last day, the Confederates led Pickett's Charge, where over 10,000 soldiers attacked the Union line but were repulsed. Lee then retreated back to Virginia. About 23,000 soldiers from each army died.


Title: Surrender at Vicksburg
Description: 


Title: First military draft
Description: 


Title: New York City Draft Riots
Description: 


Title: Second Battle of Fort Sumter
Description: 


Title: Second Battle of Sabine Pass
Description: 


Title: Battle of Wauhatchie
Description: 


Title: Battle of Campbell's Station
Description: 


Title: Gettysburg Address
Description: A speech given by President Abraham Lincoln at Gettysburg about four month after the climactic battle there. Just 271 words, it is one of the most famous speeches in American history.

Full Text
https://to.pbs.org/2X5mBOy


Title: Battle of Chattanooga
Description: 


Title: Battle of Lookout Mountain
Description: 


Title: Battle of Missionary Ridge
Description: 


Title: Battle of Mine Run
Description: 


Title: Reconstruction
Description: The post-Civil War period that oversaw the redevelopment of both the North and South that had been ruined by the conflict. Additionally, plans were created and executed to punish or forgive the South for their transgressions.

The moderate Republican plan, championed by Lincoln in 1863, involved Southerners pledging loyalty to the Union to receive amnesty and restoration of all non-human property. Once 10% of the Confederacy had pledged loyalty, they would be allowed to elect their new state government. However, Lincoln died before this could be carried out.

The Wade-Davis Bill, pushed by radical Republicans in Congress (eg Charles Sumner and Thaddeus Stevens), proposed the seizure and redistribution of plantation land in the South to recently emancipated slaves. This passed Congress, but was not signed by Lincoln.
 
What was eventually passed was President Johnson's plan, which involved pardoning all Confederates except large plantation owners and rebel leaders (most of whom were pardoned individually). He also allowed them to select their own government, leading the South to elect the old aristocracy and Confederate leaders.

This period saw three Constitutional amendments passed, securing black rights. The 13th abolished slavery, the 14th provided guaranteed birthright citizenship, and the 15th guaranteed the suffrage of black males. The last was enforced by the US Army, who was sent by the government to oversee the compliance with the new law in the South. These troops were recalled in 1877 as part of the condition for electing President Hayes, ending the Reconstruction Era.


Title: Kilpatrick-Dahlgren Raid
Description: 


Title: Siege of Petersburg
Description: 


Title: Battle of Atlanta
Description: 


Title: Battle of Ezra Church
Description: 


Title: Battle of the Crater
Description: 


Title: Battle of Globe Tavern
Description: 


Title: Union capture of Atlanta
Description: 


Title: Battle of Saltville
Description: 


Title: Battle of Tom's Brook
Description: 


Title: Battle of Westport
Description: 


Title: Nevada becomes a state
Description: Nevada (NV) joins the US as the 21st free state and the 36th state overall. Nevada is the last free state, as well as the last state in general, to join before there was a distinction between free and slave states (with the passing of the 13th Amendment).


Title: Battle of Johnsonville
Description: 


Title: Election of 1864
Description: 


Title: Sherman's March to the Sea
Description: 


Title: Sand Creek Massacre
Description: A massacre by the US military against Cheyenne and Arapaho Native Americans. On February 8, 1861, Cheyenne leader Black Kettle signed the Treaty of Fort Wise, ceding most of the tribe's territory in an exchange for a 600-square mile reservation in Colorado. In June 1864, Colorado Governor John Evans invited Native Americans friendly to the Union to camp near the military forts for protection. Black Kettle and his people moved there in August, and was encouraged to hunt by Sand Creek. In late November, Colonel John Chivington and his troops launched an unprovoked assault against the Cheyenne, along with the Arapaho that were also at the creek. They killed over 100, mutilating the bodies and burning their village down. Though the massacre was celebrated at first, investigations conducted revealed the attack for what it was. Chivington resigned his post, but aside from that no punishment was ever administered for the perpetrators.

Deaths:
9 US troops
133 Native Americans


Title: Battle of Franklin
Description: 


Title: Delaware rejects the 13th Amendment
Description: 


Title: Columbia burned
Description: 


Title: Freedman's Bureau founded
Description: A federal organization dedicated to helping blacks integrate into society after their emancipation. They offered legal, educational, and medical assistance, as well as help with housing and food. Tennessee President Johnson vetoed the renewal of the Bureau in February 1866, but was overturned by the radical Republican Congress. The Bureau was constantly understaffed, underfunded, and frequently assaulted by white supremacy groups like the KKK. Despite this, they managed to provide help to millions of people until their dissolution in 1872 by Congress under pressure from white Southerners


Title: Richmond captured
Description: 


Title: Battle of Appomattox Court House
Description: 


Title: Johnson Administration
Description: 


Title: President Lincoln is assassinated
Description: President Abraham Lincoln is assassinated by Southern extremist John Wilkes Booth. He is succeeded by Andrew Johnson.


Title: Powder River War
Description: A conflict between the US military and the Sioux, Cheyenne, and Arapaho Native Americans. It started with the Battle of Platte Bride, in which Native American warriors attacked a bridge that was cutting through their territory. A punitive expedition was ordered on Powder River County, with the first battle commencing on August 13 at Crazy Women's Fork between the Pawnee Scouts led by Captain Frank J. North (employed by the US military) and a group of Cheyenne warriors. After North's success, he ambushed another group of Cheyennes at the Powder River Massacre on August 16. On August 28, Brigadier General Patrick E. Connor attacked and destroyed an Arapaho village in the Battle of Tongue River on August 29. US troops and Native Americans skirmished along the Powder River for the first week of September. On the 8th, 2000 US troops and civilians happened upon a Native American village of 2500, leading to a fight, though few were killed (less than five). The expedition was ended by Connor due to his deeming of most of the troops to be unfit for service. The expedition was largely unsuccessful for the US, as it did not significantly intimidate the Native Americans or reduce their power in the region. Further attempts would be made at taking the Powder River county in Red Cloud's War.

Casualties:
31 US troops killed
15 US troops wounded

100 Sioux/Cheyenne/Arapaho killed
21 Sioux/Cheyenne/Arapaho captured


Title: Thirteenth Amendment
Description: The 13th amendment to the Constitution is ratified, which abolishes slavery and involuntary servitude, except for punishment as a crime. It was part of the Reconstruction Amendments, and ended the distinction between free and slave states.


Title: First Ku Klux Klan formed
Description: The first Ku Klux Klan, aka the KKK or the Klan, was founded. It was a white supremacist organization founded by six ex-Confederates in Pulaski, TN. The group began to expand, frequently engaging in violent attacks like lynching. They eventually broke apart in 1871 after the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1871.


Title: The Fenians are driven into the US
Description: 


Title: Red Cloud's War
Description: 


Title: First train robbery
Description: 


Title: Nebraska becomes a state
Description: Nebraska (NE) joins the US as the 37th state.


Title: Alaska Purchase
Description: The US purchase of the territory of Alaska from the Russians. The Eurasian country wanted to sell the territory due to a lack of resources and its inhabitability. The US desired the land to remove Russian presence from North America. Additionally, both sides were in favor of surrounding and possibly annexing British Columbia. Russia hoped to take away power from its semi-European rival and the US was eager for any land it could get its hands on. Specifically, the US was interested in the Aleutian Islands, which stretched across the North Pacific Ocean to Asia. It was believed that these islands would make good coaling stations for trans-Pacific ships. The deal was made between US Secretary of State William H. Seward and Russian Minister to the US Eduard de Stoeckl. The US purchased all 586,412 miles of Alaskan Territory for $7.2 million (~2¢/acre). The reception to the US public was mostly supportive, but a few media outlets criticized the high price and also thought the land to be useless. The deal was nicknamed "Seward's Folly" and the territory "Seward's Icebox." The complaints quickly faded when gold was discovered in the territory in 1896.


Title: Midway Atoll annexed
Description: 


Title: Charles Dickens gives his first public reading in the US
Description: 


Title: Louisa May Alcott's <i>Little Women</i>
Description: 


Title: President Johnson is impeached
Description: President Andrew Johnson tries to replace Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton, a Republican radical appointed by President Lincoln. The Senate passes the Tenure of Office Act that prevents the president from removing officials confirmed by the Senate without their approval. Johnson tries twice to replace the secretary, first with Ulysses S. Grant, then with Lorenzo Thomas. After the second time, the Senate impeaches Johnson, but narrowly misses the 2/3 vote required to end his term.


Title: Decoration Day first observed
Description: 


Title: Fourteenth Amendment
Description: The 14th amendment to the Constitution is ratified, which contained four main sections:

Section 1: All "privileges and immunities" of federal citizenship are granted to anyone born or naturalized in the US, which cannot be infringed upon by state laws.
Section 2: House of Representatives seats must be based on its total population, including blacks. The right to vote is guaranteed to all male citizens 21 years or older.
Section 3: No one who has taken up arms against the government (ie former Confederates) can hold any federal office, unless overturned by a 2/3 Congress vote.
Section 4: No government, state or federal, is responsible for debts or lost slaves incurred by Confederates from the war.


Title: Election of 1868
Description: 


Title: Treaty of Fort Laramie
Description: 


Title: Grant Administration
Description: President: Ulysses S. Grant
Number: 18
Party: Republican
Home State: Ohio
Vice President: Schuyler Colfax (until 1973)
Henry Wilson (until 1875)

Prior Occupations (no prior offices):
Commanding General of the US Army (1864-69)

Nicknames: Useless
Unconditional Surrender Grant (due to his demand for as such during the Battle of Fort Donelson in the Civil War)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
41st Congress: Republican / Republican
42nd Congress: Republican / Republican
43rd Congress: Republican / Republican
44th Congress: Republican / Democrat

Chief Justice: Salmon P. Chase (1869 - 1873)
Morrison Waite

Notable Qualities:
First president since Jackson to have served two full terms
Nearly ran for a third term


Title: First transcontinental railroad
Description: The world's first transcontinental railroad was opened in the United States. It connected Sacramento, CA with Council Bluffs, IA, spanning 1,912 miles. This connected the westernmost parts of the US with the rest, allowing for settlement of the frontier much more quickly, as instead of sailing around the continent or traveling for months in a wagon, people could arrive effortlessly in just a few days. It connected people more strongly, allowing businesses to think and market nationally instead of locally. This allowed foe the national economy to expand rapidly, helping the Second Industrial Revolution to take place and secure the country's place as a global commercial power.


Title: Knights of Labor founded
Description: The Knights of Labor (KOL) was one of the first labor unions in the US. Though founded by Uriah Stephens, it is most closely associated with Terrence Powderly. They were most powerful during the mid-1880s, with 800,000 members by 1886 (20% of all workers).

Their main platform was for an 8-hour workday, but also pushed for an end to child labor and a graduated income tax. They would accomplish this by way of strikes, as well as a "cooperative commonwealth" between workers and companies. The KOL was unique in that it was open to almost all groups of people, including blacks, women, Catholics, and immigrants (though not the Chinese, as they feared their jobs would be taken by them). However, their main demographic was to the working class. Because of this, the union was very diverse and contained many different perspectives. However, they were often the scapegoat for attacks by radicals, as the KOL contained an anarchist sect. The Haymarket Square Riot dealt a huge blow to their movement, as several KOL members were convicted for starting the incident. Ultimately, they were seen as too radical, and were quickly losing members to their rival union, the AFL. In 1890, there were only 100,000 left, with membership quickly declining thereafter. The group persisted with about 50 members until 1949, when it officially disbanded.


Title: Standard Oil founded
Description: The oil corporation Standard Oil was founded by John D. Rockefeller. At its time, it was the largest oil refinery in the world. It specialized in the technique of horizontal integration, meaning that it eliminated all of its competition by buying them up or bankrupting them, effectively securing a monopoly on US oil. The company suffered its demise in 1911, when the Supreme Court ruled in <i>Standard Oil of New Jersey v. United States</i> that the corporation violated the anti-monopoly law the Sherman Antitrust Act, and forced it to dissolve into 32 separate companies, including modern-day Exxon Mobil and Chevron.


Title: Fifteenth Amendment
Description: The 15th amendment to the Constitution is ratified, which prohibits the denial of the right to vote based on "race, color or previous condition of servitude."


Title: Enforcement Acts
Description: A series of federal laws that:
-banned terrorism used to restrict voting rights based on skin color
-instituted a punishment for failure to comply with the 15th Amendment
-deployed US troops to Southern states in order to enforce the 15th Amendment
-suspended habeas corpus for these purposes

The second and third acts, passed in 1870 and 1871, were revisions to this law. The main part of the act was the third point, as it forced the South to allow blacks the right to vote. President Grant used the law to fine or imprison hundreds of Klansmen, managing to essentially destroy the organization. These troops were later recalled by President Hayes as per the Compromise of 1877.


Title: Christmas declared a federal holiday
Description: 


Title: Louisa Ann Swain casts a ballot
Description: Louisa Ann Swain was a woman from Laramie, WY who was the first woman in the US to legally cast a vote after 1807.


Title: Weather Bureau makes its first forecast
Description: 


Title: Great Chicago Fire
Description: A large 3-day fire in Chicago, IL.

There is no confirmation of the fire's origin, but the most prevailing tale was peddled by Chicago Tribune's Michael Ahern, who blamed Mrs. O'Leary's cow knocking over a lantern as the fire's catalyst. However, Ahern later admitted he had fabricated the story. Lawyer Richard Bales, who looked into the incident for evidence, suspected the perpetrator to be Daniel "Pegleg" Sullivan, the first to warn the city of the fire. Other theories include fires already existing around Chicago or a meteor impact.

What is known is that the fire started around the O'Leary family barn, and soon spread rapidly across the largely-wooden city, exacerbated by drought conditions. The fire burned until October 10, where rain combined with the effort from firefighters extinguished the last of the flames. Looters took advantage of the chaos until October 11, when martial law was declared in the city.

Casualties:
300 people
Thousands of buildings
$200 million in damage


Title: Battle of Ganghwa
Description: A punitive expedition in Korea by the US Army. US diplomats were sent to Korea, but were fired upon due to a misunderstanding resulting from US aggression and Korean isolation. The US responded by attacking several Korean forts, which were poorly guarded to due outdated weaponry possessed by the Korean army. After about 15 minutes of fighting, five forts had been taken and the battle was over. The Koreans did not attack future US ships, but also refused to negotiate anything with the nation until 1882.

Casualties:
3 US troops killed
10 US troops wounded

243 Korean troops killed
20 Korean troops captured


Title: Yellowstone designated as the first national park
Description: 


Title: Election of 1872
Description: 


Title: <i>Mary Celeste</i> discovered
Description: 


Title: Slaughterhouse cases
Description: A Supreme Court decision determining that the "Privileges and Immunities" clause of the 14th Amendment only applied to federal citizenship and the rights associated with it. The decision arose from several Supreme Court cases involving slaughterhouses.

In 1860s New Orleans, entrails from butchered animals were tossed into the Mississippi River, contaminating the city's drinking water. In response, Louisiana passed a law Creating a New Orleans-based corporation, the Crescent City Livestock Landing and Slaughter-House Company, which would gather all slaughterhouses in the city around the South and away from the Mississippi. All slaughterhouses had to work under Crescent City, granting the company a monopoly in the city.

Several lawsuits by the Butchers' Benevolent Association were fruitless, as the courts all ruled in favor of Crescent City. A few cases were then appealed to the Supreme Court. The butchers argued that Crescent City violated their rights under the 14th Amendment. This had originally been intended to grant citizenship to newly-emancipated blacks during Reconstruction, but no specification of race was included in the wording of the amendment, meaning that it technically applied to all US citizens. In a 5-4 decision, the Supreme Court ruled that the 14th Amendment was only to apply to former slaves, and anyway it only pertained to rights granted by national citizenship, not state. Therefore, the butchers' rights were not infringed.

Crescent City would last until 1879, when the Louisiana government dissolved it. The decision was significant because it significantly limited the reach of the 14th Amendment.


Title: Levi Strauss's blue jeans
Description: 


Title: First successful train robbery
Description: 


Title: Andrew Hallidie tests the first cable car system in San Francisco
Description: 


Title: Panic of 1873
Description: 


Title: Women's Christian Temperance Union founded
Description: The Women's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) was founded, which strived to create a "sober and pure world" by banning the manufacture and sale of drinking alcohol. It believed that alcohol was the root of many social problems, such as domestic violence, which was why they wanted it abolished. Over time, the WCTU increased both in membership (with 500,000 members by 1890) and scope, until it began focusing on female suffrage. It asserted that women were not weak and dependent (indeed, they claimed that women were the morally superior sex), and became the largest female organization of the time. The WCTU still exists today.


Title: Greenback Party founded
Description: Sometime in 1874, the Greenback Party is founded. They advocated for paper money, and in 1884 expanded their ideology to include an income tax, an 8-hour work day, and women's suffrage. The party did not find too much support, but had significant present in several counties in mining areas. The party never had a president elected, and dissolved by 1889.


Title: Civil Rights Act of 1875
Description: 


Title: Reciprocity Treaty with Hawaii
Description: 


Title: <i>Minor v. Happersett</i>
Description: A Supreme Court case in which it was ruled that the Constitution did not grant anyone the right to vote. The case arose because of Virginia Minor, a member of the National Woman Suffrage Association, who attempted to vote in Missouri. The state had passed a law preventing women from voting, so Minor sued the voting registrar, Reese Happersett. Minor argued that the 14th Amendment granted her the "privileges and immunities of citizenship," of which suffrage was one. However, the Court ruled in a 9-0 decision that while the 14th Amendment did make Minor a citizen, suffrage was not an inherent right of US citizens. Therefore, the Constitution did not grant anyone citizenship. This decision killed a large part of women's rights movements, as the only way to counter the decision would be a repealing of said decision by the Court or a constitutional amendment by Congress. The latter would later occur in 1920, where the newly passed 19th Amendment would prevent sex as a limiting factor for suffrage.


Title: First Kentucky Derby
Description: 


Title: Mark Twain's <i>The Adventures of Tom Sawyer</i>
Description: 


Title: All American Indians ordered onto reservations
Description: 


Title: Black Hills War
Description: Otherwise known as the Great Sioux War of 1876, it was a conflict between the US against the Cheyenne and Sioux Native Americans. It was over the Black Hills, grounds sacred to the Sioux. Gold was discovered in the Black Hills, causing thousands of American prospectors to infringe upon the Fort Laramie Treaty that protected the land from US encroachment and go looking for gold. Initially, the US Army was deployed to kicked out prospectors, but was soon stopped by President Grant. After the Sioux refused to move to the Indian Territory in modern-day Oklahoma, the US sent the military to forcefully evict them.

On March 17, 1876, Colonel Joseph J. Reynolds sent troops to burn a Northern Cheyenne village. They succeeded, but were repulsed before they could continue attacking. The war climaxed at the Battle of the Little Bighorn, where Lieutenant Colonel George A. Custer and his men were killed by Native American warriors on June 25. General George Crook burned a small village and defeated a punitive Native American force led by Crazy Horse the next day. Colonel Nelson A. Miles pushed deep into Sioux territory, forcing many Sioux into surrendering or fleeing to Canada. On November 25, Colonel Ranald S. Mackenzie defeated a village of Northern Cheyenne in the Dull Knife Fight, convincing the tribe to surrender and be relocated to Indian Territory.

The large pressure from US military forces, combined with intense diplomatic attempts to push the Sioux into submission, came to fruition in April 1877, where leaders began surrendering en masse. The last surrender was made by Crazy Horse on May 5, though he was later stabbed to death by an American soldier.

The war divided the Lakota tribe. As compared to Red Cloud's War, most Lakota had already been relocated to reservations and did not support the war. The Lakota began to become inspired by the Ghost Dance movement, which would help lead to the Wounded Knee Massacre.

Casualties: 
310 US and US-allied Native Americans killed
265 Lakota and Cheyenne killed


Title: Telephone patented
Description: The telephone, a revolutionary invention that allowed the transmission of sound across long distances, was patented. Its inventor, Alexander Graham Bell, explained that the telephone "could make a current of electricity vary in intensity precisely as the air varies in density during the production of sound." He made the first successful telephone call on March 10, in which he told his assistant, "Mr. Watson, come here. I want you."


Title: Battle of the Little Bighorn
Description: The largest battle in the Great Sioux War of 1876, it was a conflict between US forces under Lieutenant Colonel George Armstrong Custer and an alliance of Sioux and Cheyenne warriors under Crazy Horse and Sitting Bull. Custer tracked Sitting Bull to a massive village by the Little Bighorn River in the Montana Great Plains. Custer severely underestimated the Native American forces, putting their numbers at 800 as opposed to the several thousand they actually had lying in wait to attack. He then made the fatal mistake of dividing his forces into three to scout the area. He realized he did not have enough soldiers to take the village, to he sent a scout to contact the rest of the army. Meanwhile, warriors led by Crazy Horse surrounded Custer and his men and attacked. Custer retreated to a hilltop, but he, along with all 200 of his men, were killed. The event became known as Custer's Last Stand, one of the worst defeats suffered by the US military. The loss enraged the American people, and generated more enthusiasm for attacking the Sioux and Cheyenne.

Casualties:
274 US troops dead
49 US troops wounded
136 Native American warriors dead
160 Native American warriors wounded


Title: Colorado becomes a state
Description: Colorado (CO) joins the US as the 38th state.


Title: Election of 1876
Description: A presidential election that placed Ohio Republican Rutherford B. Hayes as the 19th president over New York Democrat Samuel J. Tilden. It was notable due to the highly contested results and the controversial deals that resulted from it. The first electoral vote count put Tilden at 184 and Hayes at 165, with 20 votes from three states (FL, LA, SC) in dispute, which were the only Southern states still under Republican control. To settle the dispute, a special electoral commission of 15 was created, comprised of five Congressmen, five Senators, and five Supreme Court justices. 7 were Democrats, and 8 were Republicans (though one was ostensibly independent). They voted along party lines to award all three states to Hayes, winning him the presidency by one vote. Meanwhile, the Compromise of 1877 was struck, guaranteeing Democratic cooperation in Congress in return for the removal of troops from the South. It is uncontested that Tilden won the popular vote but lost the presidency, one of only five times in the country's history to happen.


Title: Dull Knife's village sacked
Description: 


Title: Compromise of 1877
Description: An informal, unwritten compromise between the Democratic and Republican Parties just after the election of 1876. Due to the contested states leaving the electoral college unable to decide a victor, it was proposed and accepted that Rutherford B. Hayes would win all three states (thus winning the presidency by one electoral vote) in return for the following:
-the removal of all US troops from the South (stationed from the Enforcement Acts
-the appointment of at least one Southern Democrat to the presidential cabinet

However, there was no confirmation this compromise ever took place, as Hayes had announced his support for the removal of US troops during his campaign, and it was fairly commonplace for a narrowly elected president to appoint a cabinet member from the opposing party.


Title: Hayes Administration
Description: President: Rutherford Birchard Hayes
Number: 19
Party: Republican
Home State: Ohio
Vice President: William A. Wheeler

Prior Offices:
OH Congressman (1865-67)
OH Governor (1876-77, 1868-72)

Nicknames: His Fraudulency
Rutherfraud B. Hayes

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
45th Congress: Republican / Democrat
46th Congress: Democrat / Democrat

Chief Justice: Morrison Waite

Notable qualities:


Title: Crazy Horse surrenders
Description: 


Title: Nez Perce War
Description: A conflict between the US and the Nez Perce tribe in the West (OR, ID, MT, and WY) over land. In 1855, the Treaty of Walla Walla was signed, granting the tribe 7.5 million acres of land in the territory they controlled. However, the US infringed upon this agreement in 1877 and insisted the tribe move to a reservation in Idaho. The Nez Perce refused, spurring the US to send the military in to force them. A couple hundred Nez Perce fled to Canada for safety, while a smaller group attempted to fend off the US attackers. The war climaxed with the Battle of the Big Hole in southwest MT Territory, where both the Nez Perce and the US suffered several dozen casualties. Nearly all the Nez Perce leaders, such as Looking Glass, Ollokot, and Toohoolhoolzote, were killed. On September 30, the US Brigadier General Nelson A. Miles led a surprise attack on Nez Perce Chief Joseph, who surrendered by October 5. In his famous speech, Chief Joseph declared that "I am tired of fighting. Our chiefs are killed… The little children are freezing to death. My people, some of them, have run away to the hills, and have no blankets, no food. No one knows where they are -- perhaps freezing to death. I want to have time to look for my children, and see how many of them I can find… My heart is sick and sad. From where the sun now stands I will fight no more forever."

Casualties:
125 US troops killed
146 US troops wounded

103-133 Nez Perce killed
71-891 Nez Perce wounded
418 Nez Perce surrendered
150-200 Nez Perce fled to Canada


Title: Brigham Young dies
Description: 


Title: Crazy Horse killed
Description: 


Title: Thomas Edison demonstrates his phonograph at the offices of Scientific American
Description: 


Title: Yale Daily News founded
Description: It was the first daily college newspaper in the US.


Title: Kansas Exodus
Description: A mass migration of blacks from the South to Kansas, seeking economic opportunity, political equality, access to education, and freedom from violence. The name comes from the Book of Exodus in the Bible, which describes the mass emigration of Jews from Egypt where they were enslaved to the Promised Land. Within two years, 40,000 to 60,000 blacks left for the state. Those who supported the exodus painted Kansas as idyllic as the Promised Land of the Biblical Jews. However, blacks were frequently only hired for menial work in the cities, and even then employers preferred to have white migrants work instead. Nevertheless, the migrants preferred it to the South and most remained.


Title: Female attorneys authorized to argue before the Supreme Court
Description: 


Title: Gilbert and Sullivan's "Pirates of Penzance"
Description: 


Title: Election of 1880
Description: 


Title: Garfield Administration
Description: President: James Abram Garfield
Number: 20
Party: Republican
Home State: Ohio
Vice President: Chester A. Arthur
Secretary of State: James A. Blaine

Prior Offices:
OH Congressman (1863-80)
Chair of the House Military Affairs Committee (1867-69)
Chair of the House Financial Services Committee (1869-71)
Chair of the House Appropriations Committee (1871-75)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
47th Congress: Evenly divided / Republican

Chief Justice: Morrison Waite

Notable Qualities:
Was assassinated


Title: First ever international phone call
Description: 


Title: President Garfield shot
Description: President James A. Garfield was shot by Charles J. Guiteau at the Baltimore and Potomac Railroad Station.

Guiteau's motive comes from the 1880 election. Guiteau wrote a speech supporting early Republican candidate and former president Ulysses S. Grant and condemning Winfield Scott Hancock, the Democratic nominee. However, Grant lost to Garfield, prompting Guiteau to quickly revise his speech to "Garfield against Hancock," though he accidentally left some of Grant's accomplishments credited to Garfield. His speech was published but never administered, and not many read it. However, Guiteau not only believed he was the one responsible for Garfield's narrow victory, but that he deserved an important diplomatic position as a reward. Guiteau continued harassing White House officials for his position until he was eventually banned from entering the building. Guiteau then decided he had been ordained by God to assassinate Garfield.

He purchased a revolver, then shot Garfield twice on July 2 as he was to leave the White House for a vacation. Though Garfield was not expected to last the night, he lived for several months. The wounds soon became infected, and it is now estimated that had Garfield had more competent doctors his life could have been saved. He died from an aneurysm on September 19.

Guiteau was soon arrested and brought to trial. Though he acted very strangely in the courtroom and despite the arguments made by the defense, Guiteau was not clinically insane and thus could not be acquitted. He was found guilty and sentenced to death, hanging on January 25, 1882.


Title: Tuskegee Institute founded
Description: 


Title: Sitting Bull surrenders
Description: 


Title: Arthur Administration
Description: President: Chester Alan Arthur
Number: 21
Party: Republican
Home State: Vermont
Secretary of State: James A. Blaine

Prior Offices: 
NY Militia Engineer-in-Chief (1861-63)
NY Militia Inspector general (1862)
NY Militia Quartermaster general (1862-63)
Collector of the Port of NY (1871-78)
Chairman of the NY State Republican Executive Committee (1879-81)
Vice President (1881)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
47th Congress: Evenly divided / Republican
48th Congress: Republican / Democrat

Chief Justice: Morrison Waite

Notable qualities:


Title: President Garfield dies
Description: 


Title: Shootout at the O.K. Corral
Description: 


Title: Chinese Exclusion Act
Description: A federal law that barred all immigration from China into the US and declared that no Chinese immigrant would be eligible for citizenship. The original law lasted for ten years, but was renewed for another decade in 1892 and made permanent in 1902. As a result, immigration from China to the US (primarily California) was drastically reduced. It was replaced by the Magnuson Act in 1943, which allowed a small number of Chinese (105) to immigrate every year. Immigration eventually increased in 1952, when racial barriers for immigration were abolished.


Title: Thomas Edison's first hydroelectric power plant
Description: 


Title: Pendleton Act
Description: A federal law requiring government positions to be filled based on merit rather than affiliation. This ended what was known as the "spoils system." Introduced by President Andrew Jackson, it involved giving top-level positions in the federal government to political allies, even if they were not qualified to fill the position. The law was added because of the circumstances surrounding President James A. Garfield's assassination. His killer, Charles J. Guiteau, was mad at Garfield because Guiteau believed he deserved an important position in government because of his (perceived) assistance in the 1880 election that won Garfield the presidency. However, he was not granted such a position, leading to the assassination. Furthermore, the Pendleton Act prevented the act of firing or demoting federal employees because of party affiliation. It created the US Civil Service Commission, which was in charge of regulating this law.


Title: Civil Rights cases
Description: A collective decision of five Supreme Court cases that invalidated the Civil Rights Act of 1875. Several cases had been brought before the Supreme Court, all of which were black plaintiffs claiming that their rights had been infringed by various businesses. They had been denied access because the facilities were designated "white only." They claimed that the Civil Rights Act of 1785, which prevented racial discrimination in theaters, public transport, etc, which had been passed by Congress because of the 14th Amendment, which held that no state could infringe on citizens' right to life, liberty, and property. In an 8-1 ruling, the Waite Court determined that the 14th Amendment only applied to state laws, not private businesses. Therefore, the Civil Rights Act was unconstitutional, as Congress had no right to obstruct the business' right to their property. This decision limited Congress's ability to establish racial equality.


Title: Mark Twain's <i>Adventures of Huckleberry Finn</i>
Description: 


Title: Demand for the eight-hour workday proclaimed
Description: 


Title: Election of 1884
Description: 


Title: <i>Our Country</i>
Description: A book written by clergyman Josiah Strong, in which he updated the idea of manifest destiny. He believed that since Anglo-Saxons had demonstrated their ability to establish liberty, Christianity, and self-government across much of the continent, they should extend these principles to all the "inferior races" across the world. These civilized savages would also begin to purchase American goods, thus benefiting the economy as well. He warned that unless the US acted soon, no land would be left for their empire. The book demonstrated the allure Americans were beginning to see in their country having an overseas empire, which would eventually come true.


Title: Cleveland Administration (1)
Description: President: Stephen Grover Cleveland
Number: 22
Party: Democrat
Home State: New Jersey
Vice President: Thomas A. Hendricks (until 1885)

Prior Offices:
Sheriff of Erie County, NY (1871-73)
Buffalo, NY Mayor (1882)
NY Governor (1883-85)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
49th Congress: Republican / Democrat
50th Congress: Republican / Democrat

Chief Justice: Morrison Waite (until 1888)
Melville Fuller

Notable Qualities:
Only president to have been reelected in a non-consecutive term


Title: Statue of Liberty arrives in New York Harbor
Description: 


Title: Haymarket Square Riot
Description: A labor protest in Haymarket Square in Chicago turned into a riot after a bomb was thrown at a police car. The protest was against the killing and wounding of workers by Chicago police the day before. As the police came to end the protest, someone threw a bomb at them, and the riot ensued. The death toll topped at seven police and one protester. Radical foreigners were blamed for the attack, and eight were convicted because of a biased jury despite the lack of evidence. Five were sentenced to death, two had life in prison and one had 15 years. The incident divided the nation; some viewed the killed civilians as martyrs while others turned hostile towards unionists.


Title: <i>Yick Wo v. Hopkins</i>
Description: A Supreme Court case in which it was decided that laws that appear race-neutral on the surface, but are applied in a racist manner, are a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment. The case originated in San Francisco, where an ordinance was passed that mandated the possession of a permit to operate a laundry in a wooden building (of which over 95% of laundries in San Francisco were). About two-thirds of laundry owners in the city were Chinese, and only one out of 200 applications from Chinese were given a permit. Meanwhile, nearly every non-Chinese applicant received a permit. This was taken to court, where it was decided that such discrimination was "intolerable in any country where freedom prevails." Though the decision was not applied in many future cases due to the 1896 <i>Plessy v. Ferguson</i> case, it was later cited in the 1950s.


Title: American Federation of Labor founded
Description: The American Federation of Labor (AFL) was founded by Samuel Gompers in Columbus, OH. It gradually became the largest labor union in the US, hitting 250,000 members by 1892, slow compared to the growth of the Knights of Labors' 800,000 in the mid-1880s. Compared to the Knights of Labor, the AFL was much more moderate. It did not organize as many strikes, and was only open to white middle-class workers from industries dominated by small businesses (eg printing, not oil). It also stressed cooperation between workers and corporations, rather than strikes and rebellion encouraged by the Knights. Likely because of this, the AFL saw much more success, and is still around to this day.


Title: Interstate Commerce Act of 1887
Description: A federal act that established the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC), the first independent regulatory agency. It was designed to regulate railroads to ensure their rates were "reasonable and just."

 The act was passed because there was very little regulation on railroad companies, allowing them to overcharge small farmers while giving discounts for political allies and big businesses. The Grange movement was formed in order to protect farmers from the abuses of these railroad companies. Grangers lobbied Congress for change, but it was the Supreme Court that saved them in the 1886 decision <i>Wabash, St. Louis & Pacific Railway Company v. Illinois</i>, in which the Court ruled that interstate railroads violated the Commerce Clause of the Constitution. As a result of this decision, the Interstate Commerce Commission was born.

However, the ICC was rather limited in its abilities. It had the authority to investigate and bring to court railroad companies for unjust practices, but only when the company operated across states. Additionally, the Supreme Court frequently ruled in favor of the corporations when they were brought to trial. The ICC would gain more power through the Hepburn Amendment in 1906, which allowed the ICC to set maximum rates and extended its jurisdiction to beyond railroads, but overall it would continue to have limited effects on business practices. The ICC was abolished in 1995.


Title: Dawes Severalty Act
Description: A federal law authorizing the president to survey Native American-controlled land and break it up into smaller segments. These segments would then be administered to Native American individuals instead of being collectively owned by the tribe. Leftover land would then be sold off to white speculators. Those who accepted this land would be granted US citizenship. The law was passed because white Americans feared Native American power in a group. Many Native Americans had issues with the law, as part of their culture was to stick together as a tribe, allowing them to continue their customs more easily. With the passage of the Dawes Act, they were being encouraged to break away from their lifestyle and adopt US customs, including family-owned land. Native Americans lost 90 million acres of land, and 90,000 Natives had none.


Title: First female mayor elected
Description: Argonia, KS elects Susanna M. Salter as Mayor.


Title: Pearl Harbor annexed
Description: 


Title: Great Blizzard of 1888
Description: 


Title: William Burrough's adding machine
Description: 


Title: Election of 1888
Description: 


Title: B. Harrison Administration
Description: President: Benjamin Harrison
Number: 23
Party: Republican
Home State: Ohio
Vice President: Levi P. Morton
Secretary of State: James A. Blaine

Prior Office:
IN Senator (1881-87)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
51st Congress: Republican / Republican
52nd Congress: Republican / Democrat

Chief Justice: Melville Fuller

Notable Qualities:
Least memorable president


Title: Oklahoma Land Rush begins
Description: 


Title: Johnstown Flood
Description: 


Title: "Gospel of Wealth"
Description: The article "Wealth," better known as the "Gospel of Wealth," was written by business magnate Andrew Carnegie. He explains that the rich, such as himself, have a moral obligation to use their money to give back to society via philanthropy. This was contrary to what had been the practice for millennia, that the rich bequeathed their heirs with their fortune, not poor strangers. He also claimed that extravagant and self-serving spending only encouraged sloth, as well as claiming that it was "a disgrace to die a rich man."


Title: Chicago expanded
Description: 


Title: Hull House founded
Description: 


Title: The Dakotas become states
Description: On the same day, North Dakota (ND) and South Dakota (SD) join the US as the 39th and 40th states, respectively.


Title: Montana becomes a state
Description: Montana (MT) joins the US as the 41st state.


Title: Washington becomes a state
Description: Washington (WA) joins the US as the 42nd state.


Title: "Czar" Thomas Brackett Reed becomes Speaker of the House
Description: 


Title: <i>The Influence of Sea Power upon History</i>
Description: A book written by naval officer Alfred T. Mahan, in which he argues that a nation requires a large fleet of ships engaged in international trade was necessary for its success. It also discussed the history of naval forces and proposed strategies for countries to dominate the seas. The book convinced Secretary of State James G. Blaine to begin looking to islands to conquer, as the US had recently settled in nearly all of the Western frontier. The US began turning its attention to Hawaii in the Pacific, and Cuba and Puerto Rico in the Caribbean to be used as strategic naval bases.

Full Text: https://bit.ly/2H6EAPW


Title: Jacob Riis's <i>How the Other Half Lives</i>
Description: 


Title: National American Woman Suffrage Association founded
Description: The National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA) was founded through the merger of the National Woman Suffrage Association (NWSA) and the American Woman Suffrage Association (AWSA). It started out with a membership of 7000 and led by Susan B. Anthony, but eventually grew to include 2 million, which made it the largest voluntary organization in the country. Its main focus was on attaining female suffrage, and pushed for the passage of the 19th Amendment. With its job accomplished, on February 14, 1920, several months before the amendment's ratification, the NAWSA changed into the League of Women Voters, an organization that exists to this day.


Title: Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890
Description: A federal law that primarily prohibits monopolies. It was written by Ohio Republican Senator John Sherman, and grants the federal government the authority to block mergers that would create monopolies, or dissolve existing ones into smaller companies. It was not enforced too strongly when it was passed, but was used frequently under Theodore Roosevelt's administration to break up large corporations like Standard Oil.


Title: Idaho becomes a state
Description: Idaho (ID) joins the US as the 43rd state.


Title: Wyoming becomes a state
Description: Wyoming (WY) joins the US as the 44th state.


Title: Sherman Silver Purchase Act
Description: A federal law passed in response to the growing demand for free silver from farmers and miners. Many farmers at the time were poor and wanted silver to influence the value of the dollar in order to generate inflation, allowing them to pay off their large debts. At the same time, mining companies had discovered large quantities of silver, which drove down the prices to the point at which silver could be extracted profitably. The Sherman Silver Purchase Act did not create free silver, but it did expand the amount of silver the federal government was required to purchase every month to 4.5 million ounces. The government became the second largest buyer of silver in the world, after only the British Crown, as the Indian rupee (the currency of a British colony) was based off of silver rather than gold. However, investors found out that they could manipulate the low market prices and government exchange rates for gold and silver to make a profit by purchasing silver, exchanging it for gold at the Treasury, then selling the gold back to the market for a profit. This put a heavy drain on US gold reserves, and the act was repealed in 1893 by President Cleveland to protect what reMained.


Title: Wounded Knee Massacre
Description: An attack by the US 7th Cavalry Regiment against the Lakota tribe on the Lakota Pine Ridge Indian Reservation near Wounded Knee River, SD. Americans were nervous about the Ghost Dance religious movement that was taking Native Americans by storm, seeing it as a threat. The 7th Cavalry Regiment arrived at the reservation to confiscate the Native Americans' guns to prevent any 'hostilities.' During this confiscation, a Native American named Yellow Bird started to make the soldiers feel uncomfortable by orating about and performing the Ghost Dance. Meanwhile, the soldiers began to become aggressive towards another Native American named Black Coyote, as he was deaf and did not know what the soldiers were demanding. Despite protests from other Native Americans, the soldiers believed him to be resisting defiantly. Black Coyote's rifle accidentally discharged, leading to the soldiers firing in retaliation. As most Native Americans were disarmed, they stood little chance against the soldiers. This event marked the end of the many wars and conflicts fought between the Europeans/Americans and Native American tribes.

Deaths:
150-300 Native Americans killed
51 Native Americans wounded
31 US soldiers killed
33 US soldiers wounded


Title: Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky conducts the first performance at New Ork's Carngegie Hall
Description: 


Title: Ellis Island Immigration Station opens
Description: 


Title: Ellis Island begins processing immigrants
Description: 


Title: Populist Party founded
Description: The Populist Party, otherwise known as the People's Party, was founded to address the growing concerns of the working class.

 The party's story starts in the 1870s with the creation of the Farmer's Alliance, the largest citizens' movement of the century. They were a politically active organization that proposed legislation to amend the problems faced by workers. For example, they proposed a plan for a subtreasury, in which farmers that could not sell all of their crops could instead give them to the government to store. The crops could then be used as collateral for loans that farmers could take out from the government. This would mean that farmers didn't have to rely on wealthy bankers for their money, who would not give good rates. The organization held sway in regional governments, but to compete on a national scale the Alliance's leaders dropped the organization and created the Populist Party in its place. The party claimed that democracy and liberty had been destroyed by corruption and inequality, and that a large number of reforming would be required to fix it. They mainly appealed to the farmers from the Alliance, but attempted to include others, such as factory workers and even women. They also tried to attract black farmers (such as sharecroppers), but it was never fully realized.

They ran their first presidential candidate, James Weaver, in 1892. He won over 1,000,000 popular votes (9%), nearly all from the West. He even managed to take 22 electoral votes, from states, including all of Kansas, Nevada, Idaho, and Colorado. However, that was still only 5%, nowhere close to winning. They combined their forces with Democratic nominee William Bryan in 1896, but he was only able to take 39% of the electoral college. The Populist Party's ideals were soon absorbed by the Democratic Party entirely, and the third party soon collapsed.

Though the Populists were never able to win a presidential election, many of their suggested policies would be gradually implemented over the next century, such as the popular election of senators or a graduated income tax. It was the most successful third party in the country's history.


Title: First automobile driven
Description: 


Title: Delaware Wedge surveyed
Description: See "Maryland-Pennsylvania-Delaware border dispute"


Title: Carnegie Steel Company founded
Description: Carnegie Steel Company was founded by Scottish-American businessman Andrew Carnegie. The company HQ was based in Pittsburgh, and utilized several modern techniques in the steel production process. The company specialized in vertical integration, meaning that it bought up companies required for every stage of steel production. While the company experienced the 1892 Homestead Strike, it was largely unaffected. In 1901, Carnegie sold the entire company to the US Steel Corporation for $480 million ($14.3 billion in 2017), with $226 million ($6.8 billion in 2017) going directly to Carnegie, making him one of the richest men in the world.


Title: Election of 1892
Description: 


Title: New Orleans general strike
Description: 


Title: Panic of 1893
Description: 


Title: Kingdom of Hawaii overthrown
Description: A coup by Hawaiian subjects, US citizens, and other foreigners that resulted in the deposition of Queen Liliuokalani. Though an independent nation, Hawaii had close ties with the US, with exemptions on tariff duties for sugar, the archipelago's main export. The sugar was produced by American-owned plantations that employed a combination of native Hawaiians, Chinese, Japanese, and Filipinos. Additionally, Hawaii allowed for the construction of a US naval base at Pearl Harbor. Conflict began brewing in the 1880s, with a group of mostly foreign rebels forming the Hawaiian Patriotic League. They drafted the Bayonet Constitution in 1887 and forced King Kalākaua to sign it, which greatly diminished his powers. In 1890, Kalākaua died, leaving his sister Liliuokalani to assume the throne. She planned to create a new constitution that strengthened the monarchy, leaving it more powerful than the legislature, where foreign businessmen held most of the power. On January 17, 1893, the rebels organized the Honolulu Rifles, consisting of 1500 men. One of them, John Good, wounded a policeman, and the Rifles began taking over buildings. They were assisted by US Government Minister John Stevens, who sent a company of Marines to Hawaii. Queen Liliuokalani and her supporters were placed under house arrest, and the Republic of Hawaii was declared by the Honolulu Rifles. President Grover Cleveland called for an investigation into the overthrow, where it was found that US military and diplomatic officials had abused their power. Stevens was fired and attempts were made to restore the monarchy, but the insurgent government refused. Meanwhile, a group of pro-annexation senators conducted their own report and acquitted Stevens of any wrongdoing. Cleveland was unable to continue negotiations as a result, and recognized the provisional government as the head of the country. The republic governed until 1898, when it was formally annexed by the US.


Title: Cleveland Administration (2)
Description: President: Stephen Grover Cleveland
Number: 24
Party: Democrat
Home State: New Jersey
Vice President: Adlai Stevenson

Prior Offices: 
Sheriff of Erie County, NY (1871-73)
Buffalo, NY Mayor (1882)
NY Governor (1883-85)
President (1885-89)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
53rd Congress: Democrat / Democrat
54th Congress: Republican / Republican

Chief Justice: Melville Fuller

Notable qualities:


Title: <i>Fong Yue Ting v. United States</i>
Description: A Supreme Court case in which it was decided that the Geary Act of 1892 was constitutional, which was a law that extended thee Chinese Exclusion Act for another 10 years, as well as shifting the burden of proof to Chinese immigrants to demonstrate the right to be in the US. Several Chinese citizens were arrested for not having a valid certificate of residence, but argued that their imprisonment lacked due process of law. The Supreme Court decided 6-3 that the federal government could regulate immigration how they wanted, including detaining or deporting immigrants without due process of law.


Title: First automobile publicly displayed
Description: 


Title: Immigration Restriction League founded
Description: The Immigration Restriction League was founded by a group of professionals from Boston, including attorney Prescott F. Hall, climatologist Robert DeCourcy Ward, and lawyer Charles Warren. All three were Harvard graduates, nativists, and white supremacists. Specifically, they were concerned about immigration taking away jobs from Americans at a time of high unemployment. They called for barring the illiterate from the US, and lobbied the federal government to pass such a law. Congress attempted it in 1897, but it was vetoed by President Cleveland. The League disbanded after Hall's death in 1921.


Title: Coxey's Army marches on Washington
Description: Coxey's Army was a March by unemployed workers to Washington DC to protest to the federal government for the financing of projects that would create jobs for the unemployed. It was led by Ohio businessman Jacob Coxey and began as 100 men in Ohio on March 25. The group began receiving more attention, and their numbers had increased five-fold when they reached the capital on April 30. They were promptly arrested for trespassing on the grass of the US Capitol, killing the interest in the protest.


Title: Pullman Strike
Description: A large railroad strike, mostly in Chicago, IL, organized by the American Railway Union (ARU). They were protesting that the Pullman Company had cut their wages due to the Panic of 1893, yet the workers' rent costs had stayed the same, leaving many workers unable to afford housing. The ARU, led by Eugene V. Debs, had control of over a third of Pullman workers, who organized a boycott of the company. In just a few days, over 100,000 workers had joined the boycott. On June 29, Debs gave a speech in Blue Island, IL that enraged workers into burning buildings and attacking trains. Workers all over the country joined the strike, prompting federal intervention in the form of Attorney General Richard Olney. He obtained a court injunction demanding that workers quit the strike. When they refused, Brigadier General Nelson Miles commanded a force of over 10,000 US troops, leading to conflict with the workers. Their justification was that the shutdown of the railroad system inhibited the government's duty to deliver mail. Public response was divided, but most people supported Pullman including AFL founder Samuel Gompers.. The media played on American's nativist feelings by portraying the strikers as lawless foreigners. Debs was arrested, but the charges were dropped. The government ordered Pullman to sell is residential facilities. Congress created Labor Day as a federal holiday in an effort to appease workers angry about the event.
 
Casualties:
30 strikers killed
57 strikers wounded
$80 million in property damage


Title: First graduated income tax
Description: 


Title: Frederick Douglass dies
Description: 


Title: Atlanta Compromise
Description: The Atlanta Exposition Speech was written and given by Booker T. Washington, in which he announced the Atlanta Compromise. This was an agreement between Washington and white Southern leaders that proposed blacks submitting to white rule in exchange for basic education and due process of law. Submitting to white rule entailed not creating activist movements to push for black rights. Washington, the president of the Tuskegee Institute, held a large amount of sway in the black community. Washington was a proponent of compromising with whites, instead of stubbornly insisting on full racial equality, something he didn't believe was practical. He advocated for toning down the protests and working together with whites, especially for attaining education, which he believed was a necessary right for blacks.


Title: First US Golf Open
Description: 


Title: First gasoline-powered race
Description: 


Title: Fourth American Party System
Description: 


Title: Utah becomes a state
Description: Utah (UT) joins the US as the 45th state.


Title: H. H. Holmes hanged for serial murder
Description: 


Title: <i>Plessy v. Ferguson</i>
Description: A landmark Supreme Court decision that declared racial segregation to be constitutional provided the designated facilities were "separate but equal."

The case was over the constitutionality of the Separate Car Act, a law passed in Louisiana requiring separate cars for blacks and whites on railroads. Homer Plessy, a barely mixed-race man (⅞ white, ⅛ black), classified as a black under Louisiana law, tried to board the white-only car. After he refused to leave, he was arrested and brought to court. After several appeals, his case was brought to the SCOTUS. The Court decided in a 7-1 ruling that although the 14th Amendment guaranteed political equality for all races in the US, it could not guarantee social or any other form of equality. They claimed that as long as the designated areas were equal, there was no way to show that the segregation implied black inferiority. The lone dissenter, John Marshall Harlan, declared that "Our constitution is color-blind," and that in the future people would look at the decision to be as bad as the Dred Scott Decision, a prediction that became true.


Title: "Cross of gold" speech
Description: A speech given by Democratic presidential nominee William Jennings Bryan at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago, IL. His main concern in the speech, and indeed his campaign, was the gold standard, the practice of assigning a particular value to the dollar based on the current amount of gold possessed by the US. This prevented the currency from fluctuating wildly, as the amount of gold the country had would not drastically change over a short period of time. However, this hurt farmers badly, who were suffering economically at the time due to an excess of supply of crops and livestock. Bryan called for "free silver," which would extend the gold standard to include the amount of silver in US supply as well. Since the US had a large amount of silver, this would allow more money to be produced which would help ease farmers out of debt to banks. Before the speech, Bryan was considered a dark horse candidate with little support, but he became wildly popular after giving it. He pointed out that "Burn down your cities and leave our farms, and your cities will spring up again as if by magic; but destroy our farms and grass will grow in the streets of every city in the country." Bryan was also deeply religious and a strong supporter of the Social Gospel movement. He evoked strong emotions in his audience with Biblical imagery, declaring "You shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns. You shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold." As he delivered this last line, Bryan stuck his arms out as if he were being crucified like Jesus. It is often considered to be one of the best political speeches in US history, and helped him win the nomination for president.

Full Text: https://bit.ly/1dtBcY9


Title: National Association of Colored Women founded
Description: The National Association of Colored Women (NACW) was founded, which brought together various clubs in order to advocate for racial and gender equality. They participated in campaigns for women's suffrage, and protested against Jim Crow laws and lynching. They also gave aid to the poor, educated women in house life and child rearing, and fought against gambling and drinking in black communities. Most of all, they challenged the prevailing idea that black women were not as respectable as their white counterparts, as they were frequently portrayed by whites as being prostitutes and thieves. Their first president was Mrs. Mary Church Terrell, and membership grew to 300,000 by 1918. The NACW still exists today.


Title: Gold discovered at Klondike, AK
Description: Gold was discovered in large quantities in Rabbit Creek (modern-day Bonanza Creek) by George Carmack and Skookum Jim. Soon, the entire creek was claimed by prospectors, and 100,000 people flocked to the Alaskan Territory to strike it rich, mostly Americans. Though not as significant as the California Gold Rush, it nevertheless inspired some of the same feelings of romanticism and excitement among the American people, as well as facilitating the creation of new towns and businesses in the region. The enthusiasm for the Gold Rush petered out by 1898, with the Spanish-American War taking up the headlines, after which the rush to Alaska was left behind.


Title: Election of 1896
Description: A presidential election that placed Ohio Republican William McKinley as the 25th president over Nebraska Democrat William Jennings Bryan. This succeeded the election of 1892, in which the Populist Party saw a relatively successful campaign, though they did not come close to winning the election. In 1896, the Democratic Party ran Bryan on their ticket, a man very sympathetic to the Populists' ideals, thus "acquiring" their party. Bryan insisted on campaigning state-by-state, delivering fiery speeches that whipped his audiences into a frenzy. In one such speech, he claimed the working man was being crucified upon a gold cross, a reference to the growing dislike by the working class of the gold standard, an economic system in which the value of the nation's currency was directly tied to how much gold it possessed in its reserves. McKinley, on the other hand, was considered the safer candidate, promising nothing too radical. He also had the advantage of having over thirty times the campaign finances as Bryan, as he was pro-big business and therefore had millions put into his campaign by robber barons (Bryan's campaign raised $300 thousand, while McKinley's hit $10 million). Another distinction of the election was that the two candidates gave speeches themselves, as opposed to the past where candidates had their campaign team vouch for them. When voting day came around, Bryan swept the West and South, but McKinley won the more populated New England and Midwest, securing the presidency for him. The election was significant because it was considered to be the first modern election, and that it showed the changing issues for the parties. It also meant the end of one of the most successful third parties in the country's history.


Title: McKinley Administration
Description: President: William McKinley
Number: 25
Party: Republican
Home State: Ohio
Vice President: Garret Hobart (until 1899)
Theodore Roosevelt (starting in 1901)
Secretary of State: John Hay

Prior Offices:
OH Congressman (1885-91)
Chair of the House Ways and Means Committee (1889-91)
OH Governor (1892-96)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
55th Congress: Republican / Republican
56th Congress: Republican / Republican

Chief Justice: Melville Fuller

Notable Qualities:
Died in office


Title: Treaty of Annexation of Hawaii
Description: 


Title: Dingley Tariff
Description: An expensive tariff levied by the McKinley Administration, specifically Maine Congressman Nelson Dingley, Jr. It imposed duties on wool and hides, and increased the ones on woolens, linens, silks, china, and sugar. It was not only the highest tariff in the country's history (about 52%), but also the longest-lived (12 years). It was repealed in 1909.


Title: Lattimer Massacre
Description: 


Title: <i>Women and Economics</i>
Description: A book written by Charlotte Perkins Gilman, in which she suggests that women were growing more independent by being allowed to work in more industries. This would cause a dramatic change in family life and the economy, both of which Gilman argues are good. She writes that women were only kept down in their roles as housewives, essentially servants to their husbands and children. If they were allowed further into the workforce, they could be truly liberated and could contribute to society.


Title: USS <i>Maine</i> explosion
Description: The ship the USS Maine exploded in Havana Harbor, Cuba. The ship was docked there due to the Cuban revolt taking place against Spain. The exact cause of the explosion is unknown. An 1898 naval board appointed by the McKinley Administration found that it was due to a mine explosion. However, there is more evidence that the incident arose due to an internal coal fire that ignited the Maine's magazines, which created the explosion. Nevertheless, the event was heavily politicized. Cuba believed the ship was deliberately blown up by the US in order to manufacture a reason for a war against Spain. The American sensationalist "yellow press" pushed the notion that it was an unprovoked attack by Spain, though they did not provide a clear motive. Regardless of its cause,the McKinley Administration used the destruction of the Maine to declare war on Spain, leading to the Spanish-American War.

Casualties:
261 USS Maine crewmen (officers, sailors, Marines)
1 ship


Title: <i>United States v. Wong Kim Ark</i>
Description: 


Title: Teller Amendment
Description: An amendment to a bill that required all US troops to leave Cuba after its independence had been secured from Spain, allowing it to govern itself. It was passed in order to prove that the US only had humanitarian aims behind the Spanish-American War, not economic or imperialist ones. As promised, after the war, US troops left the island, but the Platt Amendment passed in 1901 forced Cuba to cede important powers to the US, brewing resentment between the two countries.


Title: Spanish-American War
Description: A conflict between the United States and Spain. The war stemmed from the Cuban Revolution, in which Cubans seeked to overthrow their Spanish overlords and establish an independent republic. Spain violently repressed such rebellions, which US media used to shock the country into anger against Spain. Americans began thinking about intervening in Cuba to help them establish independence. Then, on February 15, the USS Maine, docked in the Cuban Havana Harbor, mysteriously exploded. The sensationalist "yellow press" in the US "blamed the Maine on Spain," creating the catchphrase "Remember the Maine! To hell with Spain!" Congress used both of these reasons to declare war on Spain on April 21.

The actual war was short and uncontested - Spain's military power was waning rapidly while the US's was on the rise. The first battle was on May 1 at Manila Bay in the Philippines. The US squadron was led by Commodore George Dewey, who destroyed the Spanish armada there in just a few hours with under 10 people wounded. A dozen US ships attacked Puerto Rico's capital of San Juan on May 12.

Dewey then brought Emilio Aguinaldo, a Filipino rebel, from exile in Hong Kong and persuaded him to encourage his fellow Filipinos to revolt against Spain, which they did. US and Filipino forces quickly overwhelmed the Spanish, until Aguinaldo declared Philippine independence on June 12. Guam was captured on June 21, as they had no gunpowder and were unaware that Spain was at war. As for the campaign in Cuba, the US's main goal was to capture the city of Santiago. On June 6, Guantanamo Bay was invaded by sea. On June 24, US forces were ambushed by 2000 Spanish soldiers headed by General Antero Rubín in the Battle of Las Guasimas. On June 29-30, over 400 US and Cuban soldiers tried to land near the San Juan River to deliver supplies, but were repelled by the Spanish at the Battle of Tayacoba.

On July 1, a group of 15,000 US troops launched an attack against over 1000 entrenched Spanish soldiers in the Battles of El Caney and San Juan Hill. When the troops arrived in Santiago, they began a siege, as well as digging trenches around the city. On July 3, the Battle of Santiago de Cuba commenced, the largest naval engagement of the war, in which US forces defeated the Spanish Caribbean Squadron. Over 1500 soldiers were captured, including Spanish Admiral Pascual Cervera y Topete. On he 25th of the month, over 1000 troops led by General Nelson A. Miles landed in southwest Puerto Rico and fought the Battle of Yauco.

Four days after capturing it, the US was driven from Fajardo, Puerto Rico. On August 7, troops started to leave Cuba due to an onset of yellow fever. On August 13, US troops captured the city of Manila, but refused to allow the Filipinos in, ending their alliance in the war and generating resentment that would lead to the Philippine-American War.

With its navy destroyed, Spain surrendered, causing an armistice to be declared on August 12, with fighting ceasing in Puerto Rico on the 13th, and in the Philippines on the 14th. On December 10, the Treaty of Paris was signed between the US and Spain, forcing the latter to surrender its territories.

It is one of five wars in which Congress officially declared it so.


Title: Battle of San Juan Hill
Description: The deadliest battle in the Spanish-American War. A few months before the war broke out, Theodore Roosevelt resigned his post as assistant secretary of the navy to raise a cavalry unit named the Rough Riders, composed of cowboys, immigrants, Ivy League athletes, and a few Native Americans. He was strongly pro-war, as he believed it would provide desperately needed unity among Americans. On July 1, the Rough Riders joined the 3rd Cavalry Regiment in attacking Kettle Hill, a strategic location east of Santiago, Cuba. Assisted by Gatling gun fire from Lt. John Parker, the Riders made it to the top of the hill and captured it. Roosevelt and his men then crossed a ravine to assist in the battle at nearby San Juan Hill but were ordered to Kettle to prepare for a Spanish counterattack. It was repelled, and the hill was secured. This put the US Army Fifth Crops in a good position to besiege Santiago, which would put an end to the war. Roosevelt and the Rough Riders attained great fame through the battle.

Casualties:
144 US troops dead
1024 US troops wounded
72 US troops missing

114 Spanish troops dead
366 Spanish troops wounded
2 Spanish troops missing
318 Spanish troops surrendered


Title: Newlands Resolution
Description: 


Title: Treaty of Paris (1898)
Description: A treaty signed between the US and Spain that officially ended the Spanish-American War. After two months of negotiations, it was determined that Spain would cede its claims to the island territories of Cuba, the Philippines, Puerto Rico (PR), and Guam (GU). The US would have control over the latter two, as well as the Philippines in exchange for $20 million. Cuba would have de jure independence, but would be controlled by the US indirectly through the Platt Amendment. Additionally, the US would be granted a permanent military base on Cuba, eventually determined to be Guantanamo Bay.

In the US, Republicans generally supported it, while Democrats were critical that the US was becoming an imperialist empire. Some of these people joined the American Anti-Imperialist League, which included several influential and powerful people including industrialist Andrew Carnegie, author Mark Twain, AFL founder Samuel Gompers, and former president Grover Cleveland. Nevertheless, the treaty was ratified by the US Senate on February 6, 1899 in a 57-27 vote, only one higher than the 2/3 vote required. It went into effect on April 11 the same year.

With the acquisition of several overseas territories, the US transformed into a world power. Filipinos were initially supportive of the war because they believed the US would grant them independence, but when they were officially annexed, the archipelago rebelled against its new colonial overlord. The US economy continued to flourish with the addition of the sugar plantations in Cuba.


Title: Moro Rebellion
Description: 


Title: Philippine-American War
Description: 


Title: Mount Rainier National Park established
Description: 


Title: Open Door Policy
Description: Secretary of State John Hay authored the Open Door Note, a message to European powers about China. Thanks to the First Sino-Japanese War in 1895, China was left vulnerable to conquest by European powers like Great Britain, Germany, France, Russia, Austria, and Italy. Hay feared the country would be carved up and distributed in a manner similar to Africa. In his note, he swore that China would remain open to equal trade with all countries, provided that foreign nations made no move to annex it. The policy was issued out of fear that the US would lose out on valuable trades if the country were conquered, though it also extended sympathy towards anti-imperialist sentiments. Most European countries refused to agree with this policy, as it was not economically incentivising.


Title: First automobile death
Description: Henry Bliss is the first person in the US to be killed in an automobile accident.


Title: US arbitrates UK-Venezeula border dispute
Description: This event was a turning point in US-British relations. By allowing the US to arbitrate the border issue, the UK had implicitly given up its authority in South America, yielding to the Monroe Doctrine. The UK saw the US more favorably, as they got most of what they wanted out of the deal.


Title: Election of 1900
Description: 


Title: Tripartite Convention
Description: The US, Great Britain, and Germany signed the Tripartite Convention, which partitioned the Samoan Islands into German and US territories. The US claimed the eastern territories, while Germany took the west.


Title: First House Majority and Minority Leaders chosen
Description: 


Title: <i>Sister Carrie</i>
Description: A book written by muckraker Theodore Dreiser that describes a young woman with big dreams experiencing the horrors of working in Chicago. She starts out as a factory worker, but was repulsed by the working conditions and he negative attitudes expressed by the other workers towards her. She is then hired as a prostitute by a wealthy salesman, and later goes on to become an actress. It was not received too well upon publication, it was later celebrated as one of the greatest American urban novels. It was deemed highly realistic, though was somewhat controversial because it was upsetting to read and contained sexual content.


Title: Kodak's "Brownie" camera released
Description: 


Title: Panama Canal treaty
Description: 


Title: Gold Standard Act
Description: A law that fixed gold as the only standard for exchanging for paper currency, ending any practice of "free silver." The US had already mostly been on this system since the Coinage Act of 1872, but this made it official. This practice made it easier to exchange currency with foreign countries that also used the gold standard, like Germany and Great Britain, as well as keeping the currency stable. However, it hurt poor people like farmers, as currency devaluation would help them pay off their debts. The value of the US dollar was fixed at 25 8⁄10 grains of gold at 90% purity. It would remain until 1933.


Title: <i>The Wizard of Oz</i>
Description: The famous children's book, The Wizard of Oz, was published by L. Frank Baum. It was based on the events of the 1890s. The characters' goal, the Emerald City, represents Coxey's Army Marching to Washington DC, with the city colored green for money. At the center of the moneyed city sits the Wizard of Oz, a mysterious con man representing President McKinley. The only way to the Emerald City is along a "yellow brick road," representing bars of gold, ie the gold standard. The Wicked Witches, the main villains of the book, represent industrialists and wealthy capitalists. Finally, the main character, Dorothy, is from Kansas, the heartland of America where many farmers lived, and wears silver slippers after the metal many farmers wanted US currency to be based off of. It became one of the most popular books in the country, getting a more famous movie adaptation in the 1930s.

Full Text: https://bit.ly/2TpkQ0o


Title: Boxer Rebellion
Description: 


Title: Eight-Nation Alliance occupies Beijing
Description: 


Title: Battle of Pulang Lupa
Description: 


Title: Battle of Mabitac
Description: 


Title: Platt Amendment
Description: An amendment to the 1901 Army Appropriations Bill. The amendment stipulated US-Cuba relations, specifically the dominance of the former over the latter. It proposed eight points:

1) Cuba May not grant non-US foreign nations control over the island
2) Cuba May not assume public debt in order to pay for the country's expenses
3) the US May intervene to protect Cuban independence, its republican government, and to enact the points in this amendment
4) Every federal US law is valid in Cuba during its military occupation
5) Cuba will ensure that the island is sanitized to be free of disease
6) The Isle of Pines is not part of Cuba
7) Cuba will sell or lease land for naval bases or coaling stations to the US so it can protect itself and Cuba
8) Cuba will include these points in a permanent treaty with the US


Title: Socialist Party founded
Description: 


Title: President McKinley is assassinated
Description: President William McKinley is shot twice by Leon Czolgosz. The president dies on the 14th of the same month.


Title: T. Roosevelt Administration
Description: President: Theodore "Teddy" Roosevelt Jr.
Number: 26
Party: Republican
Home State: New York
Vice President: Charles W. Fairbanks (starting in 1905)
Secretary of State: John Hay, Elihu Root

Prior Offices: 
NY State Assembly member (1882-84)
NY State Assembly Minority Leader (1883)
President of the NYC Board of Police Commissioners (1895-97)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (1897-98)
NY Governor (1899-1900)
Vice President (1901)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
56th Congress: Republican / Republican
57th Congress: Republican / Republican
58th Congress: Republican / Republican
59th Congress: Republican / Republican
60th Congress: Republican / Republican

Chief Justice: Melville Fuller

Notable Qualities:
Youngest president at 43 years old
First Progressive president (not that he ran on their ticket when he was elected, but he sympathized with their cause and passed legislation favorable to them)


Title: <i>The New Empire</i>
Description: 


Title: Scott Joplin's <i>The Entertainer</i>
Description: 


Title: First full-time movie theater
Description: 


Title: 1902 Coal Strike
Description: 


Title: Rights to Panama Canal purchased
Description: 


Title: <i>The Great Train Robbery</i>
Description: This was the first silent film.


Title: Women's Trade Union League founded
Description: The Women's Trade Union League was founded. It was inspired by a British organization of the same name, and attempted to associate itself closely with the American Federation of Labor (AFL). Though the AFL was usually tepid towards the WTUL, they did gain more female members and started supporting female suffrage because of them. In 1909, they organized the Uprising of the 20,000, an unsuccessful strike by Jewish women in shirtwaist factories. They supported the 8-hour workday, a minimum wage, worker protections and female suffrage. They disbanded in 1950.


Title: US Department of Commerce and Labor established
Description: 


Title: Cuba begins leasing Guantanamo Bay
Description: 


Title: Hay-Herran Treaty
Description: 


Title: Ford Motor Company founded
Description: The Ford Motor Company was founded by Henry Ford. Ford made large contributions to the automobile and assembly line, allowing them to be used much more practically. In 1908, he invented the Model-T, which was durable enough to drive over the country's bumpy roads. Ford made a niche in the automobile market by focusing on low prices and quick and reliable output, in contrast to the slow but superior craftsmanship of the Mercedes in Europe. The difference was much like how factory-produced goods began to take over from ones made by artisans. In 1913, Ford adopted the moving assembly line, in which automobiles were assembled by workers that placed individual parts onto the car as it traveled along a conveyor belt. This greatly sped up production of cars, making him so much money that he raised the wages of his factory workers to five dollars a day in 1914, over double what most factory workers were paid. However, workers were discontented with working at the company, as they found the work on assembly lines to be much too tedious. Ford also made frequent use of armed detectives and spies to discourage unions from forming. Ford's idea of mass producing goods for mass consumption was named Fordism.


Title: Panama declares independence
Description: 


Title: Joseph Gurney "Uncle Joe" Cannon becomes Speaker of the House
Description: 


Title: Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty
Description: 


Title: Wright Brothers' first flight
Description: 


Title: <i>The Shame of the Cities</i>
Description: A book written by Lincoln Steffens, and is considered to be one of the first major examples of muckraking. He focuses on corruption, especially in politics, exposing how businessmen and party leaders profited off of the system. The book drew attention to political machines in St. Louis, MO, with the people working actively to ensure that the machines lost power. He helped raise Progressive politicians to power and encourage other muckrakers to write about other social ills.


Title: <i>Northern Securities v. United States</i>
Description: 


Title: Panama Canal construction begins
Description: 


Title: New York City Subway opened
Description: 


Title: Election of 1904
Description: 


Title: Roosevelt Corollary
Description: 


Title: Industrial Workers of the World founded
Description: 


Title: Niagara Movement founded
Description: 


Title: Treaty of Portsmouth
Description: 


Title: <i>A Living Wage</i>
Description: 


Title: Upton Sinclair's <i>The Jungle</i>
Description: A novel written by muckraker Upton Sinclair, in which he describes the unpleasant living and working conditions of immigrants in Chicago and other large US cities, and proposes socialism as a cure for such social ills. However, what caught the public's attention the most was his depiction of the meat industry. Sinclair writes about how amoral and uncaring the workers were to the animals they slaughtered, and how unsanitary the conditions were in which meat was being prepared. The public was so disgusted by the book that they protested the government fix it. President Roosevelt conducted an investigation into the matter, and confirmed Sinclair's account. Congress then passed the Meat Inspection Act in 1906 to assure the public that their meat would be safe to eat.


Title: Susan B. Anthony dies
Description: 


Title: 1906 San Francisco earthquake
Description: 


Title: Hepburn Act
Description: An amendment to the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887 that allows the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to set fair rates on railroads, with Congress deciding what constituted a fair rate. The amendment was added because of numerous complaints from poor farmers that they could not afford to pay the outrageous rates charged by railroad companies. The companies were also discriminating against farmers, as they charged less for the transportation of goods from large corporations than from poor farmers, in order for both companies to make a profit. The Hepburn Act allowed the ICC to control the railroad companies, crushing the profitability of the business.


Title: Pure Food and Drug Act
Description: A law that seeked to prevent the contamination of food and drugs not scientifically found to be healthy. It came about as a result of muckrakers exposing unsanitary food preparation and drug addictions from patent medicines. The law required labels to be placed on drugs warning of habit changes that May occur. It also created the class of prescription drugs, or ones that could not be purchased without written permission from a licensed physician. It created the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in order to enforce this law, and gave it the power to prosecute noncompliers.


Title: Pablo Picasso introduces cubism
Description: 


Title: Gentleman's Agreement
Description: 


Title: Oklahoma becomes a state
Description: Oklahoma (OK) joins the US as the 46th state.


Title: Monongah Mine explodes
Description: 


Title: <i>Muller v. Oregon</i>
Description: 


Title: Henry Ford begins production of the Ford Model T
Description: 


Title: <i>The Melting Pot</i>
Description: 


Title: Election of 1908
Description: 


Title: "Lincoln Head" penny introduced
Description: 


Title: National Association for the Advancement of Colored People founded
Description: 


Title: Taft Administration
Description: President: William Howard Taft
Number: 27
Party: Republican
Home State: Ohio
Vice President: James S. Sherman (until 1912)

Prior Offices:
Solicitor General (1890-92)
Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals judge (1892-1900)
Governor-General of the Philippines (1901-03)
Provisional Governor of Cuba (1906)
Secretary of War (1904-08)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
61st Congress: Republican / Republican
62nd Congress: Republican / Democrat

Chief Justice: Melville Fuller (until 1910)
Edward Douglass White

Notable Qualities:
Fattest president
Second Progressive president (not that he ran on their ticket, but he sympathized with their cause and passed legislation favorable to them)


Title: Boy Scouts of America founded
Description: 


Title: Cannon Revolt
Description: 


Title: Border War
Description: 


Title: <i>Bailey v. Alabama</i>
Description: 


Title: Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire
Description: A large fire in the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory in New York City, NY. The workers in the factory at the time were mostly young Italian and Jewish immigrant women, about 500 in total. The factory was located on the 8th, 9th, and 10th floors of the Asch Building in Manhattan. When the fire broke out, the workers tried to escape through the doors, but found that it had been locked by the owner to dissuade thieves and truants. The fire department soon arrived, but their ladders could only reach the 6th floor. In their desperation, 46 workers jumped from the building and died in the fall. After the fire died, a hundred more bodies were found in the factory. As a result, new factory inspection laws and fire codes were passed to prevent such a catastrophe from happening again. It also strengthened organizations like the International Ladies' Garment Workers Union (ILGWU) and the Women's Trade Union League (WTUL). The two factory owners, Max Blanck and Isaac Harris, were acquitted of manslaughter but found guilty of wrongful death in a civil lawsuit, and were fined $75 per victim.

Casualties:
123 women
23 men


Title: Society of American Indians founded
Description: 


Title: <i>Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States</i>
Description: A Supreme Court decision in which Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey was found to be monopolizing the oil industry. The federal government found the company to be violating the Sherman Antitrust Act, but there was dispute over whether Congress could deny acquisitions that would normally be legal, but put a strain on competition. Standard Oil had acquired almost the entire industry in the country, and was producing 20% of US refined oil. After a lengthy deliberation on the meaning of the phrase "restraint of trade" as mentioned in the Sherman Antitrust Act, the Court decided to dissolve Standard Oil into 34 separate companies, including modern-day Exxon Mobil and Chevron.


Title: Jim Thorpe wins gold medals at the Olympic Games
Description: 


Title: Progressive Party founded
Description: 


Title: New Mexico becomes a state
Description: New Mexico (NM) joins the US as the 47th state.


Title: Arizona becomes a state
Description: Arizona (AZ) joins the US as the 48th state, becoming the last amongst the contiguous United States to attain statehood.


Title: HMS <i>Titanic</i> sinks
Description: 


Title: Election of 1912
Description: 


Title: Sixteenth Amendment
Description: 


Title: Wilson Administration
Description: President: Thomas Woodrow Wilson
Number: 28
Party: Democrat
Home State: Virginia
Prior Office: Governor
Vice President: Thomas R. Marshall

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
63rd Congress: Democrat / Democrat
64th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
65th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
66th Congress: Republican / Republican

Chief Justice: Edward Douglass White

Notable Qualities:
Last Progressive president (not that he ran on their ticket, but he sympathized with their cause and passed legislation favorable to them)


Title: Seventeenth Amendment
Description: 


Title: Federal Reserve founded
Description: 


Title: <i>Drift and Mastery</i>
Description: 


Title: Ludlow Massacre
Description: 


Title: Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand
Description: 


Title: Panama Canal opened
Description: 


Title: Federal Trade Commission Act
Description: 


Title: Clayton Act
Description: 


Title: <i>Birth of a Nation</i>
Description: 


Title: RMS Lusitania sinks
Description: 


Title: John D. Rockefeller becomes America's first billionaire
Description: Standard Oil CEO John D. Rockefeller accumulates a net worth of $1 billion, making him the country's first billionaire. He would go on to accumulate over $400 billion (in 2018 dollars).


Title: Adamson Act
Description: 


Title: Election of 1916
Description: 


Title: US Virgin Islands acquired
Description: The US Virgin Islands (VI) were purchased from Denmark for fear that the Germans would capture them and use them for a submarine base during World War I.


Title: Zimmermann Telegram
Description: 


Title: Puerto Ricans granted US citizenship
Description: 


Title: Jeanette Rankin becomes the first Congresswoman
Description: 


Title: US involvement in World War I
Description: A massive conflict mostly between European nations and their colonies. The war started with the assassination of Austro-Hungarian Archduke Franz Ferdinand by Serbian nationalist Gavrilo Princip in 1914. Austria-Hungary soon declared war on Serbia, and due to a large network of alliances made in secret, every major European power became involved. France, Russia, and Great Britain formed the Allied Powers, while Germany, Austria-Hungary, and the Ottoman Empire in the Middle East formed the Central Powers.

The US at this point in time was strongly isolationist, with the public opinion being strongly against entering in the war. US President Wilson embodied this policy (at least for Europe; he had no such issues in intervening in Latin America). The American public had been divided since 1914 on which side to support. However, Germany's invasion of neutral Belgium began tipping the public opinion in the Allied Powers' favor. US arms dealers began selling weapons to Great Britain, even sneaking them on board ships with civilians. Germany shot down one such ship, the Lusitania, with a U-boat in 1915, killing over 100 Americans. Americans started supporting intervention more, but Wilson refused. In 1917, British intelligence intercepted the Zimmermann Telegram, a message sent by Germany urging Mexico to declare war on the US to distract it from the Great War. Facing growing pressure to declare war, Wilson successfully asked Congress to do so, claiming that the country had to protect democracy by fighting against the authoritarian regime of the Central Powers. The US officially declared war on Germany and Austria-Hungary in 1917, but it took until 1918 for the first troops to arrive in Europe due to the long time it took to mobilize.

The US military was comparatively weak compared to many of the belligerent nations in the war, so in 1917 Congress created the draft, which they used to conscript 4 million men. By the summer of 1918, US troops began arriving on the Western front at a rate of 10,000 a day, putting the numbers in the Allied Powers' favor. America's main problem was experience: there were few veterans among their ranks and many of the commanding officers used obsolete battle strategies that resulted in high casualty counts. Nevertheless, they made important contributions to the war effort, including Cantigny, Chateau-Thierry, Belleau Wood, the Spring Offensive, and the Hundred Days' Offensive. They also boosted Allied morale, which had waned after Russia's capitulation to Germany. The war continued until November 1918, when an armistice was declared and peace negotiations began.

Though the war was not fought in the US, it still changed the country's home front. In order to meet costs for the war, production quotas skyrocketed.


Casualties: 
9,500,000 Allied troops/civilians (116,000 Americans)
8,000,000 Central Powers troops/civilians


Title: Espionage Act of 1917
Description: 


Title: October Revolution
Description: 


Title: Fourteen Points
Description: 


Title: Sedition Act of 1918
Description: 


Title: Russian Civil War
Description: 


Title: Debs convicted of sedition
Description: 


Title: WWI armistice
Description: 


Title: Eighteenth Amendment
Description: 


Title: Red Scare
Description: 


Title: <i>Schenck v. United States</i>
Description: 


Title: Treaty of Versailles
Description: 


Title: US population exceeds 100 million
Description: 


Title: Nineteenth Amendment
Description: 


Title: Election of 1920
Description: 


Title: KDKA becomes the first radio station to offer regular broadcasts
Description: 


Title: Harding Administration
Description: President: Warren Gamaliel Harding
Number: 29
Party: Republican
Home State: Ohio
Prior Office: Senator
Vice President: Calvin Coolidge
Secretary of the Treasury: Andrew Mellon

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
67th Congress: Republican / Republican
68th Congress: Republican / Republican

Chief Justice: Edward D. White (until 1921)
William Howard Taft

Notable Qualities:
Died in office


Title: Tomb of the Unknown Soldier founded
Description: 


Title: Emergency Quota Act
Description: 


Title: Pennsylvania-Delaware border dispute settled
Description: See "Maryland-Pennsylvania-Delaware border dispute"


Title: Sacco and Vanzetti convicted of murder
Description: 


Title: Black Sox players banned from the MLB
Description: 


Title: Sheppard-Towner Act
Description: 


Title: Washington Naval Conference
Description: 


Title: <i>American Individualism</i>
Description: 


Title: <i>Reader's Digest</i> begins publishing
Description: 


Title: Cable Act
Description: 


Title: <i>Meyer v. Nebraska</i>
Description: 


Title: President Harding dies
Description: President Warren G. Harding dies from a heart attack.


Title: Coolidge Administration
Description: President: John Calvin Coolidge Jr.
Number: 30
Party: Republican
Home State: Vermont
Prior Office: Vice President
Vice President: Charles G. Dawes (starting in 1925)

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
68th Congress: Republican / Republican
69th Congress: Republican / Republican
70th Congress: Republican / Republican

Chief Justice: William Howard Taft

Notable qualities:


Title: Immigration Act of 1924
Description: 


Title: Indian Citizenship Act
Description: 


Title: Election of 1924
Description: 


Title: <i>The Man Nobody Knows</i>
Description: 


Title: F. Scott Fitzgerald's <i>The Great Gatsby</i>
Description: 


Title: Scopes trial
Description: 


Title: <i>The Jazz Singer</i> is the first motion picture with sound
Description: 


Title: <i>Buck v. Bell</i>
Description: 


Title: First solo transatlantic flight
Description: 


Title: 15 millionth Ford Model T sold
Description: 


Title: <i>Home to Harlem</i>
Description: 


Title: Election of 1928
Description: 


Title: Walt Disney's <i>Steamboat Willie</i>
Description: 


Title: <i>Middletown</i>
Description: 


Title: William Faulkner's <i>The Sound and the Fury</i>
Description: 


Title: Hoover Administration
Description: President: Herbert Clark Hoover
Number: 31
Party: Republican
Home State: Iowa
Prior Office: Secretary of Commerce
Vice President: Charles Curtis

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
71st Congress: Republican / Republican
72nd Congress: Republican / Democrat

Chief Justice: William Howard Taft (until 1930)
Charles Evan Hughes

Notable qualities:


Title: Great Depression
Description: 


Title: Stock market crash
Description: 


Title: Richard Drew's Scotch Tape invented
Description: 


Title: Hawley-Smoot Tariff
Description: 


Title: Star Spangled Banner adopted
Description: Key's poem "The Star Spangled Banner" is officially adopted as the US national anthem.


Title: Al Capone convicted of tax evasion
Description: 


Title: Fifth American Party System
Description: 


Title: Reconstruction Finance Corporation founded
Description: 


Title: Bonus march
Description: 


Title: Election of 1932
Description: 


Title: Twentieth Amendment
Description: 


Title: Adolf Hitler becomes Chancellor of Germany
Description: 


Title: FDR Administration
Description: President: Franklin Delano Roosevelt (FDR)
Number: 32
Party: Democrat
Home State: New York
Prior Office: Governor
Vice President: John N. Garner (until 1941)
Henry A. Wallace (until January 1945)
Harry S. Truman
Secretary of Labor: Frances Perkins

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
73rd Congress: Democrat / Democrat
74th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
75th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
76th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
77th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
78th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
79th Congress: Democrat / Democrat

Chief Justice: Charles Evan Hughes (until 1941)
Harlan F. Stone

Notable Qualities:
Only president to have been elected more than twice
Only president to have served three full terms
First president to have a color photograph taken of him while in the White House
Last Congress to officially declare war


Title: First Inauguration of Franklin Roosevelt
Description: 


Title: Roosevelt's First 100 Days
Description: 


Title: Federal bank holiday declared
Description: 


Title: Emergency Banking Act
Description: 


Title: Banks reopen
Description: 


Title: Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) founded
Description: 


Title: Agricultural Adjustment Act
Description: 


Title: Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA) founded
Description: 


Title: US goes off the gold standard
Description: 


Title: Glass-Steagall Act
Description: 


Title: National Industrial Recovery Act
Description: 


Title: Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) founded
Description: 


Title: US recognizes the USSR
Description: 


Title: Civil Works Administration founded
Description: 


Title: Twenty-First Amendment
Description: 


Title: Gold Reserve Act
Description: 


Title: Tydings-McDuffie Act
Description: 


Title: Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) founded
Description: 


Title: Treaty of Relations with Cuba
Description: 


Title: Federal Communications Commission (FCC) established
Description: 


Title: US troops recalled from Haiti
Description: 


Title: Second New Deal
Description: 


Title: Works Progress Administration (WPA) founded
Description: 


Title: <i>Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States</i>
Description: 


Title: Wagner Act
Description: 


Title: Social Security Act
Description: 


Title: Neutrality Act of 1935
Description: 


Title: Italy invades Ethiopia
Description: 


Title: Jesse Owens wins four gold medals at the Summer Olympics
Description: 


Title: National Baseball Hall of Fame founded
Description: 


Title: <i>United States v. Butler</i>
Description: 


Title: Hoover Dam completed
Description: 


Title: Germany remilitarizes the Rhineland
Description: 


Title: Spanish Civil War begins
Description: 


Title: Election of 1936
Description: 


Title: Neutrality Act of 1937
Description: 


Title: Court packing plan announced
Description: 


Title: <i>West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish</i>
Description: 


Title: Bombing of Guernica
Description: 


Title: Hindenburg destroyed
Description: 


Title: Emelia Earhart disappears
Description: 


Title: Second Sino-Japanese War begins
Description: 


Title: Franklin Roosevelt's "Quarantine" speech
Description: 


Title: USS <i>Panay</i> destroyed
Description: 


Title: Ludlow Amendment defeated
Description: 


Title: Germany annexes Austria
Description: 


Title: House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) founded
Description: 


Title: Superman debuts in Action Comics #1
Description: 


Title: Munich Agreement
Description: 


Title: <i>Gone with the Wnid</i> wins the Academy Award for Best Picture
Description: 


Title: John Steinbeck's <i>The Grapes of Wrath</i>
Description: 


Title: Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact
Description: 


Title: World War II begins in Europe
Description: 


Title: Neutrality Act of 1939
Description: 


Title: Germany and Italy defeat France
Description: 


Title: Destroyers-for-bases deal with the UK
Description: 


Title: Tripartite Pact
Description: 


Title: Election of 1940
Description: 


Title: Franklin Roosevelt's "Four Freedoms" speech
Description: 


Title: Lend-Lease Act
Description: 


Title: Executive Order 8802
Description: 


Title: Mt. Rushmore carving finished
Description: 


Title: Attack on Pearl Harbor
Description: "A day which will live in infamy," the Japanese launch a surprise military strike on the Pearl Harbor naval base in Hawaii, killing over 2000 people. The attack is launched to keep the US from interfering in Japanese Pacific warfare. Instead, it goads the US into declaring war on Japan the very next day, and the country formally joins the war against the Axis Powers.


Title: US involvement in World War II
Description: Casualties:
61,000,000 Allies (405,000 Americans)
12,000,00 Axis


Title: Election of 1944
Description: 


Title: President Roosevelt dies
Description: President Franklin D. Roosevelt dies from a stroke.


Title: Atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
Description: The US drops a fission bomb on the city of Hiroshima on August 6, and another on Nagasaki three days later. In total, about 129,000 - 226,000 people died from the attacks, mostly civilians. The reason for the bombing is disputed. Some say that Japan forced their hand, that it was necessary to minimize American casualties, and the civilian death count would have been far more severe had the US gone with their original plan of a firebombing campaign in Tokyo. Others say it was simply a means to demonstrate US power to the Soviet Union, and that such an attack was unnecessary because the Japanese May have been about to surrender due to Soviet declaration of war against them.


Title: Earl Tupper's Tupperware released
Description: 


Title: Cold War
Description: 


Title: Charles Yeager becomes the first man to break the sound barrier
Description: 


Title: NASCAR holds its first modified stock car race
Description: 


Title: Organization of American States founded
Description: 


Title: Election of 1948
Description: 


Title: Korean War
Description: 


Title: Election of 1952
Description: 


Title: Eisenhower Administration
Description: President: Dwight David Eisenhower
Number: 34
Party: Republican
Home State: Texas
Prior Office: Supreme Allied Commander Europe (no prior elected office)
Vice President: Richard Nixon
Secretary of State: John Foster Dulles

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
83rd Congress: Republican / Republican
84th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
85th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
86th Congress: Democrat / Democrat

Chief Justice: Fred M. Vinson (until 1953)
Earl Warren

Notable Qualities:
First president to be sworn in on January 20


Title: Election of 1956
Description: 


Title: Alaska becomes a state
Description: Alaska (AK) joins the US as the 49th state, becoming the last American territory in North America to achieve statehood.


Title: Hawaii becomes a state
Description: Hawaii (HI) joins the US as the 50th state, becoming the last state to join the Union and the only state outside of North America. Hawaii is also the only island state.


Title: Kennedy Administration
Description: President: John Fitzgerald Kennedy
Number: 35
Party: Democrat
Home State: Massachusetts
Prior Office: Senator
Vice President: Lyndon B. Johnson

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
87th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
88th Congress: Democrat / Democrat

Chief Justice: Earl Warren

Notable Qualities:
Youngest president to be elected (age 46)
Most recent president to be assassinated in office
Most recent president to die in office


Title: First color television program broadcast
Description: 


Title: CA becomes the most populated state
Description: California overtakes New York as the most populated state in the Union, sporting almost 20 million to New York's 18.2 million. California has been the most populated state for 58 years as still is.


Title: President Kennedy is assassinated
Description: President John F. Kennedy is shot and killed by Lee Harvey Oswald.


Title: Civil Rights Act of 1964
Description: 


Title: Vietnam War
Description: 


Title: Sixth American Party System
Description: 


Title: Nixon Administration
Description: President: Richard Milhous Nixon
Number: 37
Party: Republican
Home State: California
Prior Office: Vice President
Vice President: Spiro Agnew (until 1973)
Gerald Ford

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
91st Congress: Democrat / Democrat
92nd Congress: Democrat / Democrat
93rd Congress: Democrat / Democrat

Chief Justice: Earl Warren (until 1969)
Warren E. Burger

Notable Qualities:
Only president to have ever resigned from office


Title: Ford Administration
Description: 


Title: President Nixon resigns
Description: 


Title: Carter Administration
Description: President: James Earl Carter Jr.
Number: 39
Party: Democrat
Home State: Georgia
Prior Office: Governor
Vice President: Walter Mondale

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
95th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
96th Congress: Democrat / Democrat

Chief Justice: Warren E. Burger

Notable Qualities:
Oldest living ex-president


Title: Reagan Administration
Description: President: Ronald Wilson Reagan
Number: 40
Party: Republican
Home State: Illinois
Prior Office: Governor
Vice President: George H. W. Bush

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
97th Congress: Republican / Democrat
98th Congress: Republican / Democrat
99th Congress: Republican / Democrat
100th Congress: Democrat / Democrat

Chief Justice: Warren E. Burger (until 1986)
William Rehnquist

Notable Qualities:
First president to break the Curse of Tippecanoe


Title: Bush Sr. Administration
Description: President: George Herbert Walker Bush
Number: 41
Party: Republican
Home State: Massachusetts
Prior Office: Vice President
Vice President: Dan Quayle

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
101st Congress: Democrat / Democrat
102nd Congress: Democrat / Democrat

Chief Justice: William Rehnquist

Notable Qualities:


Title: Gulf War
Description: 


Title: Clinton Administration
Description: President: William Jefferson Clinton
Number: 43
Party: Democrat
Home State: Arkansas
Prior Office: Governor
Vice President: Al Gore

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
103rd Congress: Democrat / Democrat
104th Congress: Republican / Republican
105th Congress: Republican / Republican
106th Congress: Republican / Republican

Chief Justice: William Rehnquist

Notable Qualities:
Was impeached


Title: WTO rules in favor of US in banana dispute
Description: 


Title: Anti-globalization protests in Seattle
Description: 


Title: Canal Zone tranferred to Panama
Description: 


Title: Bush Jr. Administration
Description: President: George Walker Bush
Number: 43
Party: Republican
Home State: Connecticut
Prior Office: Governor
Vice President: Dick Cheney

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
107th Congress: Republican / Republican
108th Congress: Republican / Republican
109th Congress: Republican / Republican
110th Congress: Democrat / Democrat

Chief Justice: William Rehnquist (until 2005)
John Roberts

Notable Qualities:


Title: War in Afghanistan
Description: 


Title: USS <i>Greenville</i> destroys the <i>Ehime-Maru</i>
Description: 


Title: LaGrand Case
Description: 


Title: 9/11
Description: 


Title: Civilian air traffic resumes
Description: 


Title: Patriot Act
Description: 


Title: Military Order of November 13, 2001
Description: 


Title: Permanent normalized trade relations with China
Description: 


Title: Kmart becomes the largest company to file for bankruptcy
Description: 


Title: "American Taliban" captured
Description: 


Title: "Axis of evil" speech
Description: 


Title: Yuuca Mountain designated as a national nuclear waste dump
Description: 


Title: Moscow Treaty
Description: 


Title: US withdraws from the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty
Description: 


Title: "American Taliban" pleads guilty to supplying aid to the enemy
Description: 


Title: Iran bans advertising US products
Description: 


Title: 2003 Iraq War protest
Description: 


Title: Iraq War
Description: 


Title: Military operations in Iraq begin
Description: 


Title: Arab League demands removal of US troops from Iraq
Description: 


Title: 2003 friendly fire incident
Description: 


Title: US capture of Baghdad
Description: 


Title: 2003 blackout
Description: 


Title: Travel ban on Libya lifted
Description: 


Title: War in North-West Pakistan
Description: 


Title: Massachusetts legalizes same-sex marriage
Description: 


Title: Siege on Fallujah
Description: 


Title: Hurricane Rita
Description: 


Title: NFL plays first regular season game outside the US
Description: 


Title: Scotland Yard disrupts plot to destroy aircraft
Description: 


Title: US population reaches 300 million
Description: 


Title: International Conference to Review the Global Vision of the Holocaust opened
Description: 


Title: Dalai Lama receives US Congressional Gold Medal
Description: 


Title: Great Recession
Description: 


Title: Republic of Lakotah declares independence
Description: 


Title: Start of papal journey of Pope Benedict XVI to the US
Description: 


Title: Gora Prai airstrike
Description: 


Title: Obama Administration
Description: President: Barack Hussein Obama II
Number: 44
Party: Democrat
Home State: Hawaii
Prior Office: Senator
Vice President: Joe Biden

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
111th Congress: Democrat / Democrat
112th Congress: Democrat / Republican
113th Congress: Democrat / Republican
114th Congress: Republican / Republican

Chief Justice: John Roberts

Notable Qualities:
First black president


Title: Longest professional tennis match
Description: 


Title: 2012 tornado outbreak
Description: 


Title: 2013 blizzard
Description: 


Title: 2014 tornado outbreak
Description: 


Title: War on ISIS
Description: 


Title: Intervention in Syria
Description: 


Title: Intervention in Libya
Description: 


Title: Trump Administration
Description: President: Donald John Trump
Number: 45
Party: Republican
Home State: New York
Prior Office: Chairman of the Trump Organization (no prior office)
Vice President: Mike Pence

Congressional Majority Parties (Senate / House)
115th Congress: Republican / Republican
116th Congress: Republican / Democrat

Chief Justice: John Roberts

Notable Qualities:
Current president
Wealthiest president
Oldest president ever elected (age 70)


Title: Biden Administration
Description: 


